Contents

On Einstein Himself 1
On and to His Family 29
On Aging 53
On America and Americans 61
On and to Children 75
On Death 89
On Education, Students, and Academic Freedom 97
On and to Friends, Specifi c Scientists, and Others 111
On Germans and Germany 159
On Humankind 171
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, and Zionism 191
On Life 227
On Music 233
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, and World
Government 243
On Peace, War, the Bomb, and the Military 261
On Politics, Patriotism, and Government 287
On Race and Prejudice 309
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 319
On Science and Scientists, Mathematics, and
Technology 347
On Miscellaneous Subjects 411
Abortion, Achievement, Ambition, Animals/Pets, Art
and Science, Astrology, Birth Control, Birthdays, Books,
Causality, China and the Chinese, Christmas, Clarity, Class,
Clothes, Competition, Comprehensibility, Compromise,
Conscience, Creativity, Crises, Curiosity, Death Penalty,
Doctors, England, the English, and the English Language,
Epistemology, Flying Saucers and Extraterrestrials, Force,
Games, Good Acts, Graphology, Home, Homosexuality,
Immigrants, Individuals/Individuality, Intelligence,
Intuition, Invention, Italy and the Italians, Japan and the
Japanese, Knowledge, Love, Marriage, Materialism,
Miracles, Morality, Mysticism, Nature, Pipe Smoking,
Posterity, The Press, Prohibition, Psychoanalysis, Public
Speaking, Rickshaw Pullers, Sailing, Sculpture, Sex
Education, Success, Thinking, Truth, Vegetarianism,
Violence, Wealth, Wisdom, Women, Work, Youth
Einstein’s Verses: A Small Selection 461
Attributed to Einstein 471
Others on Einstein 487
bibliography 547
index of key words 557
subject index 563
viii Contents
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
A Brief Chronology
1879 March 14, Albert Einstein is born in Ulm,
Germany.
1880 Family moves to Munich.
1881 November 18, sister Maja is born.
1885 In the fall, enters school and begins violin
lessons.
1894 Family moves to Italy, but Albert stays in Munich
to fi nish school. He quits school at the end of the
year and joins his family in Italy.
1895 Enters the Aargau Cantonal School in Aarau,
Switzerland.
1896 Relinquishes his German citizenship, is graduated
from school, and moves to Zurich at the end
of October to attend the Swiss Federal Polytechnical
Institute (the “Poly”; later the “ETH”).
1900 Is graduated from the Polytechnical Institute. Announces
he plans to marry fellow student Mileva
Mari´c.
1901 Becomes a Swiss citizen. Seeks employment
while tutoring. Begins work on a doctoral dissertation
for the University of Zurich.
1902 Probably in January, daughter Lieserl is born out
of wedlock to Mileva. June, begins an appointment
as Technical Expert at the Patent Offi ce in
Bern.
1903 January 6, marries Mileva in Bern, where they
take up residence. Lieserl may have been given
up for adoption or died, for no mention is made
of her after September of this year.
1904 May 14, son Hans Albert is born in Bern.
 
1905 Einstein’s “year of miracles” with respect to his
scientifi c publications.
1906 January 15, receives doctorate from the University
of Zurich.
1908 February, becomes a lecturer at the University of
Bern.
1909 Is appointed Extraordinary Professor of Physics
at the University of Zurich.
1910 July 28, second son, Eduard, is born.
1911 Goes to Prague to teach for a year.
1912 Becomes reacquainted with his divorced cousin
Elsa Löwenthal and begins a romantic correspondence
with her as his own marriage disintegrates.
Accepts appointment as Professor of Theoretical
Physics at the Polytechnical Institute (now the
ETH) in Zurich.
1913 September, sons Hans Albert and Eduard are
baptized as Orthodox Christians near Novi Sad,
Hungary (later Yugoslavia, now Serbia), their
mother’s hometown. Accepts a professorship in
Berlin, home of cousin Elsa.
1914 April, arrives in Berlin to assume his new position.
Mileva and the children join him but return
to Zurich in July because of Einstein’s desire to
end the marriage.
1916 Publishes “The Origins of the General Theory of
Relativity” in Annalen der Physik.
1917 October 1, begins directorship of the Kaiser Wilhelm
Institute of Physics in Berlin.
1919 February 14, is fi nally divorced from Mileva.
May 29, during a solar eclipse, Sir Arthur Eddington
experimentally measures the bending of
light and confi rms Einstein’s predictions; Einstein’s
fame as a public fi gure begins. June 2,
xxvi A Brief Chronology
 
marries Elsa, who has two daughters at home,
Ilse (age 22) and Margot (age 20).
1920 Expressions of anti-Semitism and anti–relativity
theory become noticeable among Germans, yet
Einstein remains loyal to Germany. Becomes increasingly
involved in nonscientifi c interests, including
pacifi sm and his brand of Zionism.
1921 April and May, makes fi rst trip to the United
States. Accompanies Chaim Weizmann on U.S.
fund-raising tour on behalf of Hebrew University
of Jerusalem. Delivers four lectures on relativity
theory at Princeton University.
1922 October through December, takes trip to the Far
East. November, while in Shanghai, learns that he
has won the 1921 Nobel Prize in physics.
1923 Visits Palestine and Spain.
1925 Travels to South America. In solidarity with Gandhi,
signs a manifesto against compulsory military
service. Becomes an ardent pacifi st.
1928 April, Helen Dukas is hired as his secretary and
remains with him as secretary and housekeeper
for the rest of his life.
1930 December, visits New York and Cuba, then stays
(until March 1931) at the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech), in Pasadena.
1931 Visits Oxford in May to deliver the Rhodes Lectures.
December, en route to Pasadena again.
1932 January–March, at Caltech. Returns to Berlin. December,
takes another trip to the United States.
1933 January, Nazis come to power in Germany. Gives
up German citizenship (remains a Swiss citizen)
and does not return to Germany. Instead, from
the United States, goes to Belgium with Elsa and
sets up temporary residence at Coq sur Mer.
A Brief Chronology xxvii
 
Takes trips to Oxford, where he delivers the Herbert
Spencer Lecture in June, and Switzerland,
where he makes his fi nal visit to son Eduard in a
psychiatric hospital. Early October, leaves Europe
for Princeton, New Jersey, to begin professorship
at the Institute for Advanced Study.
1936 December 20, Elsa dies after a long battle with
heart and kidney disease.
1939 August 2, signs famous letter to President Roosevelt
on the military implications of atomic energy,
which leads to the Manhattan Project.
1940 Becomes U.S. citizen.
1945 Retires offi cially from the faculty of the Institute
for Advanced Study.
1948 August 4, Mileva dies in Zurich.
1950 March 18, signs his last will. His literary estate
(the archive) is to be transferred to the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem at a time determined by
his trustees.
1952 Is offered the presidency of Israel, which he
declines.
1955 April 11, writes last signed letter, to Bertrand
Russell, agreeing to sign a joint manifesto urging
all nations to renounce nuclear weapons. April 13,
aneurysm ruptures. April 15, enters Princeton
Hospital. April 18, Albert Einstein dies at 1:15 a.m.
of a ruptured arteriosclerotic aneurysm of the abdominal
aorta.
xxviii A Brief Chronology
 
The Ultimate
einstein
Quotable
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
On Einstein Himself
 
 
A happy man is too satisfied with the present to
think too much about the future.
Written at age seventeen (September 18, 1896) for a school
essay in French entitled “My Future Plans.” CPAE, Vol. 1,
Doc. 22
Strenuous intellectual work and the study of God’s
Nature are the angels that will lead me through all
the troubles of this life with consolation, strength,
and uncompromising rigor.
To Pauline Winteler, mother of Einstein’s girlfriend Marie,
May (?) 1897. CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 34
*In many a lucid moment I appear to myself as an
ostrich who buries his head in the desert sand so as
not to perceive a danger. One creates a small world
for oneself and . . . one feels miraculously great and
important, just like a mole in its self-dug hole.
Ibid.
*I know this sort of animal personally, from my own
experience, as I am one of them myself. Not too
much should be expected of them. . . . Today we are
sullen, tomorrow high-spirited, after tomorrow cold,
then again irritated and half-sick of life—not to mention
unfaithfulness, ingratitude, and selfishness.
To friend Julia Niggli, ca. August 6, 1899, after she asked
him his opinion about her relationship with an older man.
CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 51
 
4 The Quotations
I decided the following about our future: I will look
for a position immediately, no matter how modest it
is. My scientific goals and my personal vanity will
not prevent me from accepting even the most subordinate
position.
To future wife Mileva Mari´c, ca. July 7, 1901, while having
diffi culty fi nding his fi rst job. CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 114
In living through this “great epoch,” it is difficult to
reconcile oneself to the fact that one belongs to that
mad, degenerate species that boasts of its free will.
How I wish that somewhere there existed an island
for those who are wise and of good will! In such a
place even I should be an ardent patriot!
To Paul Ehrenfest, early December 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 39
Do not feel sorry for me. Despite terrible appearances,
my life goes on in full harmony; I am entirely
devoted to reflection. I resemble a farsighted man
who is charmed by the vast horizon and who is disturbed
by the foreground only when an opaque object
obstructs his view.
To Helene Savi´c, September 8, 1916, after separation from
his family. In Popovi´c, ed., In Albert’s Shadow, 110. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 258
I very rarely think in words at all. A thought comes,
and I may try to express it in words afterwards.
 
On Einstein Himself 5
From a conversation with psychologist Max Wertheimer in
1916. In Wertheimer, Productive Thinking (New York:
Harper, 1945), footnote on p. 184
I have come to know the mutability of all human
 relationships and have learned to insulate myself
against both heat and cold so that a temperature balance
is fairly well assured.
To Heinrich Zangger, March 10, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 309
I am by heritage a Jew, by citizenship a Swiss, and
by disposition a human being, and only a human
being, without any special attachment to any state
or national entity whatsoever.
To Adolf Kneser, June 7, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 560
I was originally supposed to become an engineer,
but the thought of having to expend my creative energy
on things that make practical everyday life
even more refined, with a loathsome capital gain as
the goal, was unbearable to me.
To Heinrich Zangger, ca. August 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 597
I lack any sentiment of the sort; all I have is a sense
of duty toward all people and an attachment to
those with whom I have become intimate.
To Heinrich Zangger, June 1, 1919, regarding his lack of attachment
to any particular place, as, for example, physicist
Max Planck had to Germany. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 52
 
6 The Quotations
I also had little inclination for history [in school].
But I think it had more to do with the method of instruction
than with the subject itself.
To sons Hans Albert and Eduard, June 13, 1919. CPAE,
Vol. 9, Doc. 60
I have not yet eaten enough of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, though in my profession I am obliged
to feed on it regularly.
To Max Born, November 9, 1919. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
16; CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 162
By an application of the theory of relativity to the
taste of readers, to-day in Germany I am called a
German man of science, and in England I am represented
as a Swiss Jew. If I come to be represented as
a bête noire, the descriptions will be reversed, and I
shall become a Swiss Jew for the Germans and a
German man of science for the English!
To The Times (London), November 28, 1919, 13–14, written
at the request of the newspaper. Also referred to in a letter
to Paul Ehrenfest, December 4, 1919. See also the quotation
of April 6, 1922, below. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 26
Another funny thing is that I myself count everywhere
as a Bolshevist, God knows why; perhaps because
I do not take all that slop in the Berliner Tageblatt
as milk and honey.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 15 or 22, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 217
 
On Einstein Himself 7
With fame I become more and more stupid, which
of course is a very common phenomenon.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 24, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 233
Since the light deflection result became public, such
a cult has been made out of me that I feel like a
pagan idol. But this, too, God willing, will pass.
To Heinrich Zangger, January 3, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 242. Einstein had even been asked to give a threeweek
“performance” at the London Palladium to explain
relativity.
I do know that kind fate allowed me to find a couple
of nice ideas after many years of feverish labor.
To Dutch physicist H. A. Lorentz, January 19, 1920. CPAE,
Vol. 9, Doc. 265
An awareness of my limitations pervades me all the
more keenly in recent times because my faculties
have been quite overrated since a few consequences
of general relativity theory have stood the test.
Ibid.
I am being so terribly deluged with inquiries, invitations,
and requests that at night I dream I am burning
in hell and the mailman is the devil and is continually
yelling at me, hurling a fresh bundle of
 
8 The Quotations
letters at my head because I still haven’t answered
the old ones.
To Ludwig Hopf, February 2, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 295
My father’s ashes lie in Milan. I buried my mother
here [Berlin] only a few days ago. I myself have
journeyed to and fro continuously—a stranger everywhere.
My children are in Switzerland. . . . A person
like me has as his ideal to be at home anywhere
with his near and dear ones.
To Max Born, March 3, 1920. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
25. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 337
The teaching faculty in elementary school was liberal
and did not make any denominational distinctions.
Among the Gymnasium teachers there were a
few anti-Semites. Among the children, anti-Semitism
was alive especially in elementary school. It was
based on conspicuous racial characteristics and on
impressions left from the lessons on religion. Active
attacks and verbal abuse on the way to and from
school were frequent but usually not all that serious.
They sufficed, however, to establish an acute feeling
of alienation already in childhood.
To Paul Nathan, political editor of the Berliner Tageblatt, for
an article on anti-Semitism, April 3, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 366
I will always fondly recall the hours spent in your
home, including the pearls of Persian wisdom with
 
On Einstein Himself 9
which I became acquainted through your hospitality
and your work. As an Oriental by blood, I feel
they are especially meaningful to me.
To Friedrich Rosen, German envoy in The Hague, May
1920. Rosen had apparently been posted in Persia at one
time and edited a collection of Persian stories. Einstein Archives
9-492
It also pleases me that it is still possible, even today,
to be treated as an internationally minded person
without being compartmentalized into one of the
two big drawers.
To H. A. Lorentz, June 15, 1920. The “two big drawers” at
the time were the pro–Central Powers and the pro-Allies.
CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 56
*Don’t be too hard on me. Everyone has to sacrifi ce
at the altar of stupidity from time to time, to please
the Deity and the human race. And this I have done
thoroughly with my article.
To Max and Hedi Born, September 9, 1920, downplaying
criticism for an article he wrote. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
34. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 45
Like the man in the fairytale who turned everything
he touched into gold, so with me everything is
turned into newspaper clamor.
Ibid. To his friend Paul Ehrenfest he wrote ten years later,
on March 21, 1930, “With me, every peep becomes a trumpet
solo” (Einstein Archives 10-212).
 
10 The Quotations
Personally, I experience the greatest degree of pleasure
in having contact with works of art. They furnish
me with happy feelings of an intensity that I
cannot derive from other sources.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein,
184. Here, according to the context, Einstein refers only to
literature.
*I do not care to speak about my work. The sculptor,
the artists, the musician, the scientist work because
they love their work. Fame and honor are secondary.
My work is my life, and when I find the truth I proclaim
it. . . . Opposition does not affect my work.
Quoted in New York Call, May 31, 1921, 2. See also Illy, Albert
Meets America, 312
To be called to account publicly for what others have
said in your name, when you cannot defend yourself,
is a sad situation indeed.
From “Einstein and the Interviewers,” August 1921. Einstein
Archives 21-047
If my theory of relativity is proven successful, Germany
will claim me as a German and France will
declare that I am a citizen of the world. Should my
theory prove untrue, France will say that I am a German
and Germany will declare that I am a Jew.
From an address to the French Philosophical Society at the
Sorbonne, April 6, 1922. See also French press clipping,
 
On Einstein Himself 11
April 7, 1922, Einstein Archives 36-378; and Berliner Tageblatt,
April 8, 1922. Einstein Archives 79-535
When a blind beetle crawls over the surface of a
curved branch, it doesn’t notice that the track it has
covered is indeed curved. I was lucky enough to notice
what the beetle didn’t notice.
In answer to his son Eduard’s question about why he is so
famous, 1922. Quoted in Flückiger, Albert Einstein in Bern,
and Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 498
Now I am sitting peacefully in Holland after being
told that certain people in Germany have it in for
me as a “Jewish saint.” In Stuttgart there was even a
poster in which I appeared in first place among the
richest Jews.
To sons Hans Albert and Eduard, November 24, 1923. Einstein
Archives 75-627
Of all the communities available to us, there is not
one I would want to devote myself to except for the
society of the true searchers, which has very few living
members at any one time.
To Max and Hedwig Born, April 29, 1924. In Born, BornEinstein
Letters, 79. Einstein Archives 8-176
[I] must seek in the stars that which was denied [to
me] on Earth.
To his secretary Betty Neumann, 1924, with whom he
had fallen in love while married to Elsa, upon ending
 
12 The Quotations
his relationship with her. She was the niece of his friend
Hans Muehsam. See Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 320; and Fölsing,
Albert Einstein, 548
Imagination is more important than knowledge.
Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the
world.
In answer to the question, “Do you trust more to your
imagination than to your knowledge?” From interview
with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to Einstein,” Saturday
Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted in Viereck,
Glimpses of the Great, 447
My own career was undoubtedly determined not by
my own will, but by various factors over which I
have no control, primarily those mysterious glands
in which nature prepares the very essence of life.
In a discussion on free will and determinism. Ibid. Reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 442
To punish me for my contempt of authority, Fate has
made me an authority myself.
Aphorism for a friend, September 18, 1930. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 24. Einstein Archives
36-598
I am an artist’s model.
As recalled and noted by Herbert Samuel, who asked him
his occupation, refl ecting Einstein’s feeling that he was
constantly posing for sculptures and paintings, October 31,
1930. Einstein Archives 21-006. The photographer Philippe
 
On Einstein Himself 13
Halsmann’s version is a bit different: An elderly woman on
a bus told Einstein she must have seen his picture somewhere
because he looked familiar, and Einstein responded,
“I am a photographer’s model.” See Halsmann, letter to
editors, New York Review of Books, May 26, 1966
I have never looked upon ease and happiness as
ends in themselves—such an ethical basis I call the
ideal of a pigsty. . . . The ideals which have always
shone before me and filled me with the joy of living
are goodness, beauty, and truth. To make a goal of
comfort or happiness has never appealed to me.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930), 193–
194. See also Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 226,
for background information and the whole essay. This and
other passages from the essay have been variously translated
elsewhere. For this edition of the book, I am consistently
using the versions in Forum and Century.
*Possessions, outward success, publicity, luxury—to
me these have always been contemptible. I believe
that a simple and unassuming life is best for . . . the
body and mind.
Ibid.
*My passionate interest in social justice and social
responsibility has always stood in curious contrast
to a marked lack of desire for direct association with
men and women. I am a horse for single harness,
not cut out for tandem or team work. I have never
belonged wholeheartedly to country or state, to my
 
14 The Quotations
circle of friends, or even to my own family. These ties
have always been accompanied by a vague aloofness,
and the wish to withdraw into myself increases
with the years.
Ibid.
Many times a day I realize how much my outer and
inner life is based upon the labors of my fellow men,
both living and dead, and how much I must exert
myself in order to give in return as much as I have
received.
Ibid.
It is an irony of fate that I myself have been the recipient
of excessive admiration and reverence from my
fellow-beings, through no fault or merit of my own.
Ibid.
Professor Einstein begs you to treat your publications
for the time being as if he were already dead.
Written on Einstein’s behalf by his secretary, Helen Dukas,
March 1931, after he was besieged by one too many manuscripts.
Einstein Archives 46-487
It strikes me as unfair, and even in bad taste, to select
a few individuals for boundless admiration, attributing
superhuman powers of mind and character
to them. This has been my fate, and the contrast
 
On Einstein Himself 15
between the popular assessment of my powers and
achievements and the reality is simply grotesque.
From “Impressions of the U.S.A.,” ca. 1931, reprinted in
Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 242–246. Einstein
Archives 28-168
Although I try to be universal in thought, I am European
by instinct and inclination.
Quoted in Daily Express (London), September 11, 1933. Also
in Holton, Advancement of Science, 126
People flatter me as long as I’m of use to them. But
when I try to serve goals with which they are in disagreement,
they immediately turn to abuse and calumny
in defense of their interests.
To an unidentifi ed pacifi st, 1932. Einstein Archives 28-191
I suffered at the hands of my teachers a similar treatment;
they disliked me for my independence and
passed me over when they wanted assistants. (I
must admit, though, that I was somewhat less of a
model student than you.)
To a young girl, Irene Freuder, November 20, 1932. Reprinted
as “Education and Educators,” in Ideas and Opinions,
56. Einstein Archives 28-221
My life is a simple thing that would interest no one.
It is a known fact that I was born, and that is all that
is necessary.
 
16 The Quotations
To Princeton High School reporter Henry Russo, quoted in
The Tower, April 13, 1935
As a boy of twelve years making my acquaintance
with elementary mathematics, I was thrilled in seeing
that it was possible to find out truth by reasoning
alone, without the help of any outside experience.
. . . I became more and more convinced that
even nature could be understood as a relatively simple
mathematical structure.
Ibid.
Arrows of hate have been aimed at me too, but they
have never hit me, because somehow they belonged
to another world with which I have no connection
whatsoever.
From a statement written for Georges Schreiber’s Portraits
and Self-Portraits (Boston: Houghton Miffl in, 1936). Reprinted
in Out of My Later Years, 13. Einstein Archives
28-332
I have settled down splendidly here: I hibernate like
a bear in its cave, and really feel more at home than
ever before in all my varied existence. This bearishness
has been accentuated still further because of
the death of my mate, who was more attached to
human beings than I.
To Max Born, early 1937, after the death of Einstein’s wife,
Elsa. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 125. Einstein Archives
8-199
 
On Einstein Himself 17
I wouldn’t want to live if I did not have my work. . . .
In any case, it’s good that I’m already old and personally
don’t have to count on a prolonged future.
To close friend Michele Besso, October 10, 1938, refl ecting
on Hitler’s rise to power. Einstein Archives 7-376
I firmly believe that love [of a subject or hobby] is
a better teacher than a sense of duty—at least
for me.
In draft of a letter to Philipp Frank, 1940. Einstein Archives
71-191
*I have never given my name for commercial use
even in cases where no misleading of the public was
involved as it would be in your case. I, therefore,
forbid you to use my name in any way.
To Marvin Ruebush, who had asked Einstein for permission
to use his name in promoting a cure for stomach
aches, May 22, 1942. Einstein Archives 56-066
Why is it that nobody understands me, yet everybody
likes me?
From an interview, New York Times, March 12, 1944
I do not like to state an opinion on a matter unless I
know the precise facts.
From an interview with Richard J. Lewis, New York Times,
August 12, 1945, 29:3, on declining to comment on Germany’s
progress on the atom bomb
 
18 The Quotations
I never think of the future. It comes soon enough.
Aphorism, 1945–46. According to the Oxford Dictionary of
Humorous Quotations (2d ed., 2001), this quotation came
from an interview on the ship Belgenland in December 1930;
perhaps it was recalled later and inserted into the
archives under the later date. Einstein Archives 36-570
The development of this thought world (Gedankenwelt)
is in a certain sense a continuous flight from
“wonder.” A wonder of such nature I experienced as
a child of four or five years, when my father showed
me a compass.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 9
My intuition was not strong enough in the field of
mathematics in order to differentiate clearly the fundamentally
important . . . from the rest of the more or
less dispensable erudition. Beyond this, however, my
interest in the knowledge of nature was also unquali-
fi edly stronger. . . . In this field I soon learned to scent
out that which was able to lead to fundamentals and
to turn aside . . . from the multitude of things which
clutter up the mind and divert it from the essential.
Ibid., 15–17
The essential in the being of a man of my type lies
precisely in what he thinks and how he thinks, not in
what he does or suffers.
Ibid., 33
 
On Einstein Himself 19
There have already been published by the bucketsful
such brazen lies and utter fictions about me that
I would long since have gone to my grave if I had
allowed myself to pay attention to them.
To the writer Max Brod, February 22, 1949. Einstein Archives
34-066.1
*I lack influence [at the Institute for Advanced Study],
as I am generally regarded as a sort of petrified object,
rendered blind and deaf by the years. I find this
role not too distasteful, as it corresponds fairly well
with my temperament.
To Max and Hedi Born, April 12, 1949. In Born, BornEinstein
Letters, 178–179. (Similar to “My fame begins outside
of Princeton. My word counts for little in Fine Hall,”
as quoted by Infeld in Quest, 302.) Einstein Archives 8-223
*I simply enjoy giving more than receiving in every
respect, to not take myself nor the doings of the
masses seriously, am not ashamed of my weaknesses
and vices, and naturally take things as they
come with equanimity and humor. Many people are
like this, and I really cannot understand why I have
been made into a kind of idol.
Ibid., in reply to Max Born’s question on Einstein’s attitude
toward a simple life
My scientific work is motivated by an irresistible
longing to understand the secrets of nature and by
no other feelings. My love for justice and the striving
 
20 The Quotations
to contribute toward the improvement of human
conditions are quite independent from my scientifi c
interests.
To F. Lentz, August 20, 1949, in answer to a letter asking
Einstein about his scientifi c motivation. Einstein Archives
58-418
I have no special talents. I am only passionately
curious.
To Carl Seelig, March 11, 1952. Einstein Archives 39-013
I’m doing just fine, considering that I have triumphantly
survived Nazism and two wives.
To Jakob Ehrat, May 12, 1952. Einstein Archives 59-554
It is a strange thing to be so widely known, and yet
to be so lonely. But it is a fact that this kind of popularity
. . . is forcing its victim into a defensive position
which leads to isolation.
To E. Marangoni, October 1, 1952. Einstein Archives 60-406
All my life I have dealt with objective matters; hence
I lack both the natural aptitude and the experience
to deal properly with people and to carry out offi cial
functions.
Statement to Abba Eban, Israeli ambassador to the United
States, November 18, 1952, in turning down the presidency
of Israel after Chaim Weizmann’s death. Einstein Archives
28-943
 
On Einstein Himself 21
*I myself have certainly found satisfaction in my efforts,
but I would not consider it sensible to defend
the results of my work as being my own “property,”
like some old miser might defend the few pennies
he had laboriously scraped together.
To Max Born, October 12, 1953. In Born, Einstein-Born Letters,
195. Einstein Archives 8-231
I’m a magnet for all the crackpots in the world, but
they are of interest to me, too. A favorite pastime of
mine is to reconstruct their thinking processes. I feel
genuinely sorry for them, that’s why I try to help
them.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” October
15, 1953
In the past it never occurred to me that every casual
remark of mine would be snatched up and recorded.
Otherwise I would have crept further into
my shell.
To Carl Seelig, October 25, 1953. Einstein Archives 39-053
During the First World War, when I was thirty-fi ve
years old and traveled from Germany to Switzerland,
I was stopped at the border and asked for my
name. I had to hesitate before I remembered it. I
have always had a bad memory.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,”
November 7, 1953
 
22 The Quotations
I was supposed to be named Abraham after my
grandfather. But that was too Jewish for my parents,
so they made use of the “A” and named me
Albert.
Ibid., December 5, 1953
All manner of fable is being attached to my personality,
and there is no end to the number of ingeniously
devised tales. All the more do I appreciate
and respect what is truly sincere.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 28, 1954. Einstein
Archives 32-410
Today Mr. Berks has shown me the bust he made of
me. I admire the bust highly as a portrait and not
less as a work of art and as a characterization of
mental personality.
From a signed statement written in English, April 15, 1954.
Robert Berks is the sculptor who created the statue of Einstein
in front of the National Academy of Science in Washington,
D.C. The bust was used as a model for the statue.
The bust itself, donated by the sculptor, was placed in front
of Borough Hall, Princeton, New Jersey, in April 2005.
(Statement, of which he gave me a copy, is in possession of
Mr. Berks.)
It is true that my parents were worried because I
began to speak fairly late, so that they even consulted
a doctor. I can’t say how old I was—but surely
not less than three.
 
On Einstein Himself 23
To Sybille Blinoff, May 21, 1954. Einstein Archives 59-261.
In her biography of Einstein, Einstein’s sister, Maja, put his
age at two and a half; see CPAE, Vol. 1, lvii
I’m not the kind of snob or exhibitionist that you
take me to be and furthermore have nothing of
value to say of immediate concern, as you seem to
assume.
In reply to a letter, May 27, 1954, asking Einstein to send a
message to a new museum in Chile, to be put on display
for others to admire. Einstein Archives 60-624
It is quite curious, even abnormal, that, with your
superfi cial knowledge about the subject, you are so
confi dent in your judgment. I regret that I cannot
spare the time to occupy myself with dilettantes.
To dentist G. Lebau, who claimed he had a better theory
of relativity, July 10, 1954. The dentist returned Einstein’s
letter with a note written at the bottom: “I am thirty years
old; it takes time to learn humility.” Einstein Archives
60-226
I never read what anyone writes about me—they
are mostly lies from the newspapers that are always
repeated. . . . The only exception has been the Swiss
man, [Carl] Seelig; he is very nice and did a good
job. I didn’t read his book, either, but Dukas read
some parts of it to me.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” September
13, 1954
 
24 The Quotations
If I would be a young man again and had to decide
how to make my living, I would not try to become a
scientist or scholar or teacher. I would rather choose
to be a plumber or a peddler, in the hope of fi nding
that modest degree of independence still available
under present circumstances.
To the editor, The Reporter 11, no. 9 (November 18, 1954).
See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 485–486.
Said in response to the McCarthy-era witch hunt of intellectuals.
He felt that science at its best should be a hobby
and that one should make a living at something else (see
Straus, “Reminiscences,” in Holton and Elkana, Albert Einstein:
Historical and Cultural Perspectives, 421). A plumber,
Stanley Murray, replied to Einstein on November 11: “Since
my ambition has always been to be a scholar and yours
seems to be a plumber, I suggest that as a team we would
be tremendously successful. We can then be possessed of
both knowledge and independence” (Rosenkranz, Einstein
Scrapbook, 82–83). At other times, Einstein allegedly also
claimed that he would choose to be a musician, and suggested
the job of lighthouse keeper to young scientists in a
speech in the Royal Albert Hall in London in 1933 (Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 238).
*In the present circumstances, the only profession I
would choose would be one where earning a living
had nothing to do with the search for knowledge.
To Max Born, January 17, 1955. See Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
227. Einstein Archives 8-246
Only in mathematics and physics was I, through
self-study, far beyond the school curriculum, and
 
On Einstein Himself 25
also with regard to philosophy as it was taught in
the school curriculum.
To Henry Kollin, February 1955. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 20. Einstein Archives
60-046
The only way to escape the corruptible effect of
praise is to go on working.
Quoted by Lincoln Barnett, “On His Centennial, the Spirit
of Einstein Abides in Princeton,” Smithsonian, February
1979, 74
God gave me the stubbornness of a mule and a fairly
keen scent.
As recalled by Ernst Straus. Quoted in Seelig, Helle Zeit,
dunkle Zeit, 72
The ordinary adult never gives a thought to spacetime
problems. . . . I, on the contrary, developed so
slowly that I did not begin to wonder about space
and time until I was an adult. I then delved more
deeply into the problem than any other adult or
child would have done.
As recalled by Nobel laureate James Franck, on Einstein’s
belief that it is usually children, not adults, who refl ect on
space-time problems. Quoted in Seelig, Albert Einstein und
die Schweiz, 73
When I was young, all I wanted and expected from
life was to sit quietly in some corner doing my work
 
26 The Quotations
without the public paying attention to me. And now
see what has become of me.
Quoted in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 4
When I examine myself and my methods of thought,
I come close to the conclusion that the gift of imagination
has meant more to me than my talent for absorbing
absolute knowledge.
Similar to “Imagination is more important than knowledge”
(1929), quoted above. Recalled by a friend on the one
hundredth anniversary of Einstein’s birth, celebrated February
18, 1979. Quoted in Ryan, Einstein and the Humanities,
125
I have never obtained any ethical values from my
scientifi c work.
As recalled by Manfred Clynes. Quoted in Michelmore,
Einstein: Profi le of the Man, 251
Many things which go under my name are badly
translated from the German or are invented by other
people.
To George Seldes, compiler of The Great Quotations (1960),
cited in Kantha, An Einstein Dictionary, 175
I hate my pictures. Look at my face. If it weren’t for
this [his mustache], I’d look like a woman!
Said to photographer Alan Richards sometime during the
last ten years of his life. Quoted by Richards, “Reminiscences,”
in Einstein as I Knew Him (unnumbered pages)
 
On Einstein Himself 27
You’re the first person in years who has told me
what you really think of me.
To an eighteen-month-old baby boy who screamed upon
being introduced to Einstein. Quoted in ibid.
I have fi nished my task here.
Said as he was dying. Einstein Archives 39-095. Taken from
biographer Carl Seelig’s account; he may have heard it
from Einstein’s secretary Helen Dukas or stepdaughter
Margot Einstein.
 
 
On and to His Family
 
 
ABOUT OR TO HIS FIRST WIFE,
MILEVA MARIC´
According to Einstein, though his marriage to Mileva,
a Serbian woman, lasted for seventeen years, he
never really knew her. He recalled that he had married
her primarily “from a sense of duty,” possibly
because she had given birth to their illegitimate
child. “I had, with an inner resistance, embarked on
something that simply exceeded my strength.” They
had met at the Swiss Federal Polytechnical Institute,
where both were physics students; he was eighteen
and she was twenty-two. At the time of their marriage
about fi ve years later, he was not aware that
mental illness was hereditary on Mileva’s mother’s
side of the family. Mileva herself was often depressed
and her sister, Zorka, was schizophrenic.
Still, she was a warm and caring woman and highly
intelligent, and had much to cope with throughout
life. Because of her inability to accept her pending
divorce, Einstein’s often insensitive treatment of
her, and the decision not to bring their illegitimate
daughter, Lieserl, to live with them, Mileva became
bitter, sometimes causing diffi culties in Einstein’s relationship
with his two sons during their separation.
The many letters he wrote to them, especially to
Hans Albert, show that he tried to remain close to
them during their childhood and that he regarded
them warmly and with care and concern. He also
eventually conceded that Mileva was a good mother.
(See CPAE, Vol. 8, for these letters as well as letters
to Mileva in which the couple tries to deal with
its fi nancial and parenting diffi culties after the separation.
See also Popovi´c, ed., In Albert’s Shadow.)
 
32 The Quotations
Still, these tragic circumstances of their separation,
according to Einstein, left their mark on him into his
old age and may have amplifi ed his deep involvement
in activities of an impersonal nature. See letters
to his biographer Carl Seelig, March 26 and May 5,
1952; Einstein Archives 39-016 and 39-020
Mama threw herself on the bed, buried her head in
the pillow, and wept like a child. After regaining her
composure, she immediately shifted to a desperate
attack: “You’re ruining your future and destroying
your opportunities.” “No decent family would want
her.” “If she becomes pregnant, you’ll be in a real
mess.” With this outburst, which was preceded by
many others, I fi nally lost my patience.
To Mileva, July 29, 1900, after telling his mother that he
and Mileva planned to marry; they did not marry until
January 6, 1903. The Love Letters, 19; CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 68
I long terribly for a letter from my beloved witch. I
fi nd it hard to believe that we will be separated for
so much longer—only now do I see how much in
love with you I am! Pamper yourself, so you will
become a radiant little sweetheart and as wild as a
street urchin!
To Mileva, August 1, 1900. The Love Letters, 21; CPAE, Vol. 1,
Doc. 69
When you’re not with me, I feel as though I’m not
complete. When I’m sitting, I want to go away; when
 
On and to His Family 33
I go away, I’d rather be home; when I’m talking with
people, I’d rather be studying; when I study, I can’t
sit still and concentrate; and when I go to sleep, I’m
not satisfi ed with the way the day has passed.
To Mileva, August 6, 1900. The Love Letters, 23–24; CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 70
How was I ever able to live alone, my little everything?
Without you I have no self-confidence, no
passion for work, and no enjoyment of life—in short,
without you, my life is a void.
To Mileva, ca. August 14, 1900. The Love Letters, 26; CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 72
My parents are very concerned about my love for
you. . . . They cry for me almost as if I had already
died. Again and again they complain that I brought
misfortune on myself by my devotion to you.
To Mileva, August–September 1900. The Love Letters, 29;
CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 74
Without the thought of you, I would no longer want
to live among this sorry herd of humans. But having
you makes me proud, and the thought of you makes
me happy. I will be doubly happy when I can press
you to my heart once again and see those loving
eyes shine for me alone, and when I can kiss that
sweet mouth that trembles for me only.
Ibid.
 
34 The Quotations
I am also looking forward to working on our new
studies. You must continue with your research—
how proud I will be to have a little Ph.D. for a sweetheart
while I remain a totally ordinary person!
To Mileva, September 13, 1900. The Love Letters, 32; CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 5
Shall I look around for possible jobs for you [in Zurich]?
I think I’ll try to find some tutoring positions
that I can later turn over to you. Or do you have
something else in mind? . . . No matter what happens,
we’ll have the most wonderful life imaginable.
To Mileva, September 19, 1900. The Love Letters, 33; CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 76
I am so lucky to have found you—a creature who is
my equal, and who is as strong and independent as
I am.
To Mileva, October 3, 1900. The Love Letters, 36; CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 79
How happy and proud I will be when the two of us
together have brought our work on relative motion
to a triumphant end!
To Mileva, March 27, 1901. The Love Letters, 29; CPAE, Vol. 1,
Doc. 94. This sentence has led some to believe that Mileva
was equally responsible for the theory of relativity.
You’ll see for yourself how pleasant and cheerful
I’ve become and how all of my scowling is a thing
 
On and to His Family 35
of the past. And I love you so much again! It was
only because of nervousness that I was so mean to
you . . . and I’m longing so much to see you again.
To Mileva, April 30, 1901. The Love Letters, 46; CPAE, Vol. 1,
Doc. 102
If only I could give you some of my happiness so
you would never be sad and depressed again.
To Mileva, May 9, 1901. The Love Letters, 51; CPAE, Vol. 1,
Doc. 106
My wife is coming to Berlin with very mixed feelings
because she is afraid of the relatives, probably
mostly of you. . . . But you and I can be very happy
with each other without her having to be hurt. You
can’t take away from her something she doesn’t
have [i.e., his love].
To newfound love, cousin Elsa Löwenthal, August 1913.
CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 465
The situation in my house is ghostlier than ever: icy
silence.
To Elsa, October 16, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 478
Do you think it’s so easy to get a divorce when one
has no proof of the other party’s guilt? . . . I am treating
my wife like an employee whom I can’t fi re. I
have my own bedroom and avoid being with her. . . .
I don’t know why you’re so terribly upset by all of
 
36 The Quotations
this. I’m absolutely my own master . . . as well as my
own wife.
To Elsa, before December 2, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 488
[My wife, Mileva] is an unfriendly, humorless creature
who gets nothing out of life and who, by her
mere presence, extinguishes other people’s joy of
living.
To Elsa, after December 2, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 489
My wife whines incessantly to me about Berlin and
her fear of the relatives. . . . My mother is goodnatured,
but she is a really fiendish mother-in-law.
When she stays with us, the air is full of dynamite.
. . . But both are to be blamed for their miserable
relationship. . . . No wonder that my scientifi c
life thrives under these circumstances: it lifts me impersonally
from the vale of tears into a more peaceful
atmosphere.
To Elsa, after December 21, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 497
*He had kind of a relationship with my wife, which
no one can hold against them.
To Heinrich Zangger, June 27, 1914. Einstein presumed Mileva
had an affair with Vladimir Vari´cak, a professor of
mathematics at the University of Zagreb, who made two
important discoveries in the theory of relativity, which
were cited by Wolfgang Pauli in his review paper on relativity.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 34a, embedded in Vol. 10
 
On and to His Family 37
(A) You will see to it that (1) my clothes and laundry
are kept in good order; (2) I will be served three
meals regularly in my room; (3) my bedroom and
study are kept tidy, and especially that my desk is
left for my use only. (B) You will relinquish all personal
relations with me insofar as they are not completely
necessary for social reasons. Particularly,
you will forgo my (1) staying at home with you;
(2) going out or traveling with you. (C) You will
obey the following points in your relations with me:
(1) you will not expect any tenderness from me, nor
will you offer any suggestions to me; (2) you will
stop talking to me about something if I request it;
(3) you will leave my bedroom or study without any
backtalk if I request it. (D) You will undertake not to
belittle me in front of our children, either through
words or behavior.
Memorandum to Mileva, ca. July 18, 1914, listing the conditions
under which he would agree to continue to live
with her in Berlin. At fi rst she accepted the conditions, but
then left Berlin with the children at the end of July. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 22
I don’t want to lose the children, and I don’t want
them to lose me. . . . After everything that has happened,
a friendly relationship with you is out of the
question. We shall have a considerate and businesslike
relationship. All personal things must be kept to
a minimum. . . . I don’t expect I’ll ask you for a divorce
but only want you to stay in Switzerland with
 
38 The Quotations
the children . . . and send me news of my precious
boys every two weeks. . . . In return, I assure you of
proper comportment on my part, such as I would
exercise toward any unrelated woman.
To Mileva, ca. July 18, 1914, on his offer to continue their
marriage after his move to Berlin, to which in the end she
did not agree. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 23
I came to realize that living with the children is no
blessing if the wife stands in the way.
To Elsa, July 26, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 26
I may see my children only on neutral ground, not
in our [future] home. This is justified because it is
not right to have the children see their father with a
woman other than their own mother.
To Elsa, after July 26, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 27
How much I look forward to the quiet evenings
we’ll be able to spend chatting alone, and to all the
peaceful shared experiences still ahead of us! Now,
after all my deliberations and work I’ll find a precious
little wife at home who receives me with
cheer and contentment. . . . It wasn’t her [Mileva’s]
ugliness, but her obstinacy, inflexibility, stubbornness,
and insensitivity that prevented harmony between
us.
To Elsa, July 30, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 30
 
On and to His Family 39
There are reasons why I could not endure being
with this woman any longer, despite the tender love
that ties me to the children.
To Heinrich Zangger, November 26, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 152
You have no idea of the natural craftiness of such a
woman. I would have been physically and mentally
broken if I had not finally found the strength to keep
her at arm’s length and out of sight and earshot.
To Michele Besso, July 14, 1916. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 233
She leads a worry-free life, has her two precious
boys with her, lives in a fabulous neighborhood,
does what she likes with her time, and innocently
stands by as the guiltless party.
To Michele Besso, July 21, 1916. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 238
The only thing she is missing is someone to dominate
her. . . . What man would tolerate something so
palpably smelly being stuck up his nose all his life,
for no purpose at all, with the secondary obligation
of also putting on a friendly face?
Ibid.
From now on I will no longer bother her about a divorce.
The accompanying battle with my relatives
 
40 The Quotations
has taken place. I have learned to withstand the
tears.
To Michele Besso, September 6, 1916. Einstein’s relatives
did not approve of his leaving his marriage in limbo, feeling
it would compromise young Ilse’s (Elsa’s elder daughter’s)
eligibility for marriage. The divorce fi nally did take
place in February 1919 in Switzerland. Einstein, as the
guilty party, was ordered not to marry for the next two
years; but, despite the ban, he married Elsa just two and a
half months later since the prohibition did not apply under
German law. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 254; Fölsing, Albert Einstein,
425, 427
Separation from Mileva was a matter of life and
death for me. . . . Thus I deprive myself of my boys,
whom I still love tenderly.
To Helene Savi´c, September 8, 1916. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 258
I believe that Mitsa [Mileva] sometimes suffers from
too great a reserve. Her parents and her sister . . .
did not even know her address. In this respect, dear
Helene, you could be of great use to her, helping her
surmount her moments of discouragement. I am
deeply grateful for everything you have done for
Mitsa and especially for the children.
Ibid.
I’ve been so preoccupied with what would happen
in the event of my death that I’m surprised to fi nd
myself still alive.
 
On and to His Family 41
To Mileva, April 23, 1918, after attending to legal paperwork
that would fi nancially take care of her and the boys
in case of his death. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 515
Mileva was absolutely insufferable when we were
together. When we are not, I can like her quite well;
she seems all right to me, even as the mother of my
boys.
To Michele Besso, July 29, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 591
*From here it is difficult for me to determine whether
it might be better for Mileva and the boy [Eduard] to
move to her former homeland of Yugoslavia, . . .
where she and the boy could have an easier existence
than in expensive Switzerland. . . . I cannot
give them any more help because the political situation
has put all my relatives and my circle of friends
into extreme hardship as well, so that I’ve reached
my limits.
To Heinrich Zangger, September 18, 1938. Einstein Archives
40-116
She never reconciled herself to the separation and
divorce, and a disposition developed reminiscent of
the classical example of Medea. This darkened the
relations with my two boys, to whom I was attached
with tenderness. This tragic aspect of my life continued
undiminished until my advanced age.
To Carl Seelig, May 5, 1952, about Mileva. Einstein Archives
39-020
 
ABOUT OR TO HIS SECOND WIFE,
ELSA LÖWENTHAL
Einstein began a long-distance affair with his cousin
Elsa, who lived in Berlin, in 1912, while he was still
married to Mileva and living in Zurich. The affair
continued after the family moved to Berlin in 1914.
He was not divorced from Mileva, who soon returned
to Zurich, until February 1919. In June of
that year he married Elsa, though for many years he
had been telling friends that he had no intention of
marrying her and had even considered marrying
her daughter Ilse instead. At one time he had also
had his eye on Paula, Elsa’s younger sister. See various
letters in CPAE, Vol. 8, and Stern, Einstein’s German
World, 105n.
I will always destroy your letters, as is your wish. I
have already destroyed the fi rst one.
To Elsa, April 30, 1912, responding to her misgivings about
their affair. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 389
I must love someone. Otherwise it is a miserable existence.
And that someone is you.
Ibid.
I suffer even more than you because you suffer only
for what you do not have.
To Elsa, May 7, 1912, alluding to his diffi cult wife, Mileva.
CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 391
 
On and to His Family 43
I am writing so late because I have misgivings
about our affair. I have a feeling that it will not be
good for us, nor for the others, if we form a closer
attachment.
To Elsa, May 21, 1912. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 399
I now have someone about whom I can think with
unrestrained pleasure and for whom I can live. . . .
We will have each other, something we have missed
so terribly, and will give each other the gift of stability
and an optimistic view of the world.
To Elsa, October 10, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 476
If you were to recite for me the most beautiful
poem . . . my pleasure would not even approach the
pleasure I felt when I received the mushrooms and
goose cracklings you prepared for me; . . . you will
surely not despise the domestic side of me that is revealed
by this disclosure.
To Elsa, November 7, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 482
I really delight in my local relatives, especially in a
cousin of my age, with whom I am linked by an old
friendship. It is mostly because of this that I am accustoming
myself very well to the large city [Berlin],
which is otherwise loathsome to me.
To Paul Ehrenfest, ca. April 10, 1914, on his adjustment to
life in Berlin. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 2
 
44 The Quotations
*She [Elsa] was the main reason I came to Berlin.
To Heinrich Zangger, June 27, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 16a,
embedded in Vol. 10
*I decided on the formality of marriage with my
cousin [Elsa] after all, because her adult daughters
would otherwise be seriously harmed. It doesn’t
signify any injury either to me or my boys, but is my
duty. . . . Nothing in my life changes by it. Why
should the original sin be even harder on these poor
daughters of Eve?
To Heinrich Zangger, March 1, 1916. The Einsteins felt that
Margot and Ilse would have diffi culty fi nding marriage
partners if their mother was carrying on an affair. Yet in a
letter to Michele Besso on December 5, he once again
claimed, “I abandoned once and for all the idea of remarrying.”
The marriage in fact took place three years later.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Docs. 196a, and 283a, respectively, both embedded
in Vol. 10
I would take only one of the women with me, either
Elsa or Ilse. The latter is more suitable because she is
healthier and more practical.
To Fritz Haber, October 6, 1920, on taking a traveling companion
on a lecture trip to Norway. Einstein Archives 12-
325. He neglected to mention that he had also been infatuated
with Ilse, who was Elsa’s daughter, before Elsa’s and
his marriage (see Ilse’s letter to Georg Nicolai, May 22,
1918, CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 545).
 
ABOUT AND TO HIS CHILDREN
With Mileva, Einstein had two sons, Hans Albert and
Eduard, and a daughter, referred to as “Lieserl”; by
his marriage to Elsa, he had two stepdaughters, Ilse
and Margot. Lieserl was born in January 1902 before
Einstein and Mileva were married, and she may have
been given up for adoption or was raised by friends.
She may also have died from the effects of scarlet
fever when she was a toddler; no mention is made of
her after September 1903, and Einstein apparently
never saw her. See CPAE, Vol. 5, and The Love Letters.
There is still speculation as to the real fate of Lieserl,
who may have survived the scarlet fever and never
knew her origins, or suffered some other yet unknown
fate. Only Hans Albert had children. Eduard
developed schizophrenia at the age of twenty, though
up to that time he had been a somewhat fragile but
essentially healthy young man pursuing a medical
education. Eduard remained in Switzerland all of his
life; Einstein told his biographer Carl Seelig that he
rarely wrote to Eduard after leaving Europe for reasons
he could not analyze himself. Einstein Archives
39-060. See also the section “On and to Children” for
letters to his sons when they were children.
I’m very sorry about what has befallen Lieserl. It’s
so easy to suffer lasting effects from scarlet fever. If
this will only pass. As what is the child registered?
We must take precautions that problems don’t arise
for her later.
This somewhat cryptic (to the reader) letter was sent to
Mileva ca. September 19, 1903. Registering a child may
 
46 The Quotations
indicate the parents’ intention of giving it up for adoption.
They may have considered Lieserl’s illegitimacy a threat to
Einstein’s provisional federal appointment at the Swiss
Patent Offi ce. See CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 13, n. 4
At the time we [he and Mileva] were separating
from each other, the thought of leaving the children
stabbed me like a dagger every morning when I
awoke, but I have never regretted the step in spite
of it.
To Heinrich Zangger, November 26, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 152
Albert is now gradually entering the age at which I
can mean very much to him. . . . My influence will
be limited to the intellectual and esthetic. I want to
teach him mainly to think, judge, and appreciate
things objectively. For this I need several weeks a
year—a few days would only be a short thrill with
no deeper value.
To Mileva, who was afraid that her own relationship with
Hans Albert would suffer if he had too much contact with
his father, December 1, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 159
My compliments on the good condition of our boys.
They are in such excellent physical and emotional
shape that I could not wish for more. And I know
this is for the most part due to the proper upbringing
you are providing. . . . They came to meet me
spontaneously and sweetly.
 
On and to His Family 47
To Mileva during his visit to Zurich, April 8, 1916. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 211
*My relations with the boys have frozen up completely
again. Following an exceedingly nice Easter
excursion, the subsequent days in Zurich brought
on a complete chilling in a way that is not quite explicable
to me. It’s better if I keep my distance from
them; I have to content myself with the knowledge
that they are developing well. How much better off
I am than countless others who have lost their children
in the War!
To Heinrich Zangger, July 11, 1916. Zangger was a close
friend of Einstein’s who kept an eye on his boys. Hans Albert
lived with him occasionally when Mileva was ill.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 232, embedded in Vol. 10
Is [Hans] Albert with you yet? I miss him often. He
is already a person with a mind of his own whom
one can talk to, and so thoroughly sound in an honest
way. He rarely writes but I understand it’s not
his sort of thing. . . . It’s good he did not grow up in
the big city with its superfi ciality.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 24, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 233
Maybe I can muster enough foreign money to be
able to let them [Mileva and the children] stay in
Zurich. This may have advantages for my children’s
 
48 The Quotations
more distant future, which would justify tackling
the diffi culties.
To Michele Besso, January 6, 1920. Because of the unfavorable
Swiss/German exchange rate, Einstein had been contemplating
asking them to move to southern Germany,
where his money would go farther. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 245
I still don’t know when I can come to Switzerland.
. . . I am delighted that Albert is with you. I am
going to get European money again soon for my
family; nothing more can be done with the local currency.
. . . Albert should not get the feeling that his
Papa doesn’t worry about his upkeep.
To Heinrich Zangger, February 27, 1920, alluding to the de-
fl ation of the German mark. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 332
*My otherwise so cheerful boys are somewhat painfully
envious of both of you. . . . They feel as if I have
exchanged them for you.
To Margot Einstein, referring to her and Ilse, August 26,
1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 214
*I feel the need to thank you for the fine days I was
allowed to spend with our dear boys. I’m grateful
that you raised them in a friendly frame of mind toward
me and in an exemplary manner otherwise as
well. I am most especially satisfied with their cheerful
and modest ways; secondly, of course, also their
lively intelligence.
To Mileva, August 28, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 218
 
On and to His Family 49
*[Eduard’s] intellectual abilities may be even stronger
[than Hans Albert’s], but he seems to lack equilibrium
and a sense of responsibility (too egoistic).
Too little personal interaction with others, which
gives rise to a feeling of isolation and inhibitions of
other sorts. He is an interesting little fellow, but he
will not have an easy time in life.
To Mileva, August 14, 1925. Einstein Archives 75-963
I could be a grandpa now too if my [Hans] Albert
hadn’t married such a Schlemilde.
To his uncle, Caesar Koch, who had just become a
grandfather, October 26, 1929. Einstein Archives 47-271.
Einstein had vigorously opposed Hans Albert’s marriage
to Frieda Knecht, who was nine years his senior; but the
couple remained together until Frieda’s death. By 1930
they had made Einstein a grandpa, too, with the birth
of Bernhard. See Sotheby’s auction catalog, June 26,
1998, 424
*My defiant attitude prevented me from noticing
how much I have suffered from the personal quarrels
with all of you.
To Mileva, June 15, 1933. Translated in Neffe, Einstein, 199.
Einstein Archives 75-962
The deepest sorrow loving parents can experience
has come upon you. Everything I observed of your
little son indicated he was becoming a well-balanced
and self-assured person with a healthy outlook on
 
50 The Quotations
life. Although I saw him only for a short period, he
was as close to me as if he had grown up near me.
To Hans Albert and wife Frieda, January 7, 1939, after the
sudden death of six-year-old Klaus, their son, probably of
diphtheria. See Roboz Einstein, Hans Albert Einstein, 34
It is a thousand pities for the boy that he must pass
his life without the hope of a normal existence. Since
the insulin injections have proved unsuccessful, I
have no further hopes from the medical side. . . . I
think it is better on the whole to let Nature run its
course.
To Michele Besso, November 11, 1940, about son Eduard.
Einstein Archives 7-378
There is a block behind it that I cannot fully analyze.
But one factor is that I think I would arouse painful
feelings of various kinds in him if I made an appearance
in whatever form.
To Carl Seelig, January 4, 1954, stating why he was not
in touch with Eduard. In his will, Einstein left a larger
amount of money to Eduard than to Hans Albert. Einstein
Archives 39-059
It is a joy for me to have a son who has inherited the
chief trait of my personality: the ability to rise above
mere existence by sacrificing oneself through the
years for an impersonal goal. This is the best, indeed
the only way in which we can make ourselves inde-
 
On and to His Family 51
pendent from personal fate and from other human
beings.
To Hans Albert, May 11, 1954. Einstein Archives 75-918
Honesty compels me to admit that Frieda reminded
me of your 50th birthday.
Ibid.
When Margot speaks, you see fl owers growing.
Commenting on his stepdaughter Margot’s love of nature.
Quoted by friend Frieda Bucky in “You Have to Ask Forgiveness,”
Jewish Quarterly 15, no. 4 (Winter 1967–68), 33
ABOUT HIS SISTER, MAJA,
AND MOTHER, PAULINE
Yes, but where are its wheels?
Two-and-a-half-year-old Albert, after the birth of Maja in
1881, upon being told he would now have something new
to play with. In “Biographical Sketch,” by Maja WintelerEinstein,
CPAE, Vol. 1, lvii
My mother and sister seem somewhat petty and
philistine to me, despite the sympathy I feel for
them. It is interesting how life gradually changes us
 
52 The Quotations
in the very subtleties of our soul, so that even the
closest of family ties dwindle into habitual friendship.
Deep inside we no longer understand one another
and are incapable of empathizing with the
other, or know what emotions move the other.
To Mileva Mari´c, early August 1899, at age twenty. The Love
Letters, 9; CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 50
My poor mother arrived here on Sunday. . . . Now
she is lying in my study and suffering terribly, physically
and mentally. . . . It seems that her torments will
last a long time yet; she still looks good, but mentally
she has suffered very much under the morphine.
To Heinrich Zangger, January 3, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 242
My mother died a week ago today in terrible agony.
We are all completely exhausted. One feels in one’s
bones the signifi cance of blood ties.
To Heinrich Zangger, February 27, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 332; Einstein Archives 39-732
I know what it means to see one’s mother suffer the
agony of death and not be able to help. There is no
consolation. All of us have this heavy burden to
bear, for it is inseparably bound up with life.
To Hedwig Born, June 18, 1920, after the death of her
mother. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 28. CPAE, Vol. 10,
Doc. 59
 
On Aging
 
 
I have remained a simple fellow who asks nothing
of the world; only my youth is gone—the enchanting
youth that forever walks on air.
To Anna Meyer-Schmid, May 12, 1909. CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 154
I lived in that solitude which is painful in youth, but
delicious in maturity.
From a statement written for Georges Schreiber’s Portraits
and Self-Portraits (Boston: Houghton Miffl in, 1936). Reprinted
in Out of My Later Years, 13. Einstein Archives
28-332
There is, after all, something eternal that lies beyond
the reach of the hand of fate and of all human delusions.
And such eternals lie closer to an older person
than to a younger one who oscillates between fear
and hope.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 20, 1936. Einstein
Archives 32-387
*At our age, the devil doesn’t give you much time
off!
To Heinrich Zangger, February 27, 1938. Quoted in Seelig,
Helle Zeit, Dunkle Zeit, 45, and translated in Neffe, Einstein,
199. Einstein Archives 40-105
People like you and I, though mortal of course, like
everyone else, do not grow old no matter how long
 
56 The Quotations
we live. What I mean is that we never cease to stand
like curious children before the great Mystery into
which we were born.
To Otto Juliusburger, September 29, 1942. Einstein Archives
38-238
*Your “I feel too old” I am not taking too seriously,
because I know this feeling myself. Sometimes . . . it
surges upwards and then subsides again. We can
after all quietly leave it to nature gradually to reduce
us to dust if she does not prefer a more rapid
method.
To Max Born, September 7, 1944. In Born, Born-Einstein
Letters, 145. Einstein Archives 8-207
*Though I am now an old fogey, I am still hard
at work and still refuse to believe that God plays
dice.
To former Berlin student Ilse Rosenthal-Schneider, May 11,
1945. Einstein Archives 20-274
I am content in my later years. I have kept my good
humor and take neither myself nor the next person
seriously.
To P. Moos, March 30, 1950. Einstein Archives 60-587
All of one’s contemporaries and aging friends are
living in a delicate balance, and one feels that one’s
 
On Aging 57
own consciousness is no longer as brightly lit as it
once was. But then, twilight with its more subdued
colors has its charms as well.
To Gertrud Warschauer, April 4, 1952. Einstein Archives
39-515
I [have] always loved solitude, a trait that tends to
increase with age.
To E. Marangoni, October 1, 1952. Einstein Archives
60-406
If younger people were not taking care of me, I
would surely try to be institutionalized, so that I
would not have to become so concerned about the
decline of my physical and mental powers, which
after all is unpreventable in the natural course of
things.
To W. Lebach, May 12, 1953. Einstein Archives 60-221
I feel like an egg, of which only the shell remains—
at 75 years old, one can’t expect anything else. One
should prepare a person for his death.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” January
1, 1954
In one’s youth every person and every event appear
to be unique. With age, one becomes much
more aware that similar events recur. Later on, one
 
58 The Quotations
is less often delighted or surprised, but also less
disappointed.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, January 3, 1954. Einstein
Archives 32-408
I believe that older people who have scarcely anything
to lose ought to be willing to speak out on behalf
of those who are young and who are subject to
much greater restraint.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 28, 1954. Einstein
Archives 32-411
I am feeling my age greatly. I’m no longer so eager
to work and always have to lie down after a meal. I
enjoy living, but I would not mind if it all suddenly
ended.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,”
April 27, 1954
I no longer have the strong pains I had earlier, but I
feel very weakened, as can be expected of such an
old geezer.
Ibid., May 29, 1954
Today [due to illness] I stayed in bed and received
guests like an old lady of the eighteenth century.
This was fashionable in Paris at that time. But I’m
not a woman, and this isn’t the eighteenth century!
Ibid., June 11, 1954
 
On Aging 59
I’m like a run-down old car—something is wrong in
every corner. But life is still worthwhile as long as I
can still work.
Ibid., January 9, 1955
Even [old] age has very beautiful moments.
To Margot Einstein. Quoted in Sayen, Einstein in America,
298
 
 
On America and Americans
 
 
I am happy to be in Boston. I have heard of Boston
as one of the most famous cities in the world and the
center of education. I am happy to be here and expect
to enjoy my visit to this city and to Harvard.
On his visit to the city with Chaim Weizmann. New York
Times, May 17, 1921. Contributed by A. J. Kox in response
to the many quotations about Princeton in this book (see
later in this section).
*America is interesting, with all its hustle and bustle.
It is easier to feel enthusiasm for it than for other
countries I’ve unsettled with my presence. I had to
consent to being shown around like a prize ox to address
innumerable small and large gatherings. . . .
It’s a wonder I survived it all.
To Michele Besso, ca. May 21–30, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12,
Doc. 141
*It is the women . . . who dominate all of American
life. The men are interested in nothing at all; they
work, work as I haven’t seen anyone work anywhere
else. For the rest, they are toy dogs for their
wives, who spend the money in the most excessive
fashion and who shroud themselves in a veil of
extravagance.
From an interview in the Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant,
July 4, 1921. Einstein insisted he was wrongly quoted and
wrote a rebuttal in the Vossische Zeitung six days later,
claiming he was shocked when he read the account.
 
64 The Quotations
See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 111–112, for
an account of the fi asco.
Even if Americans are less scholarly than Germans,
they do have more enthusiasm and energy, causing
a wider dissemination of new ideas among the
people.
Quoted in the New York Times, July 12, 1921
A firm approach is indispensable everywhere in
America; otherwise one receives no payment and
little esteem.
To Maurice Solovine, January 14, 1922. Published in Letters
to Solovine, 49. Einstein Archives 21-157
Never yet have I experienced from the fair sex such
energetic rejection of my advances; or if I have,
never from so many at once.
Part of a reply to the Women Patriot Corporation, via the
Associated Press, December 1932. According to Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 261–262, the right-wing
group, under the leadership of a Mrs. Frothingham, had
protested Einstein’s American visit to the State Department,
arguing that he was the ringleader of an anarchocommunist
plot, and that the theory of relativity was subversive
and designed to promote lawlessness and shatter
Church and State. Einstein Archives 28-213
*But are they not quite right, these watchful citizenesses?
Why should one open one’s doors to a person
who devours hardboiled capitalists with as
 
On America and Americans 65
much appetite and gusto as the Cretan Minotaur in
days gone by devoured luscious Greek maidens,
and on top of that is low-down enough to reject
every sort of war, except the unavoidable war with
one’s own wife?
Ibid., 262
In America, more than anywhere else, the individual
is lost in the achievements of the many.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means
to Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 438
Americans undoubtedly owe much to the Melting
Pot. It is possible that this mixture of races makes
their nationalism less objectionable than the nationalism
of Europe. . . . It may be due to the fact that
[Americans] do not suffer from the heritage of hatred
or fear, which poisons the relations of the nations
of Europe.
Ibid., 451
*Here, everyone stands up proudly and jealously
for his civil rights. Everyone, irrespective of birth,
has the opportunity, not merely on paper but in actual
practice, to develop his energies freely for the
benefi t of the human community as a whole. . . . Individual
freedom provides a better basis for productive
labor than any form of tyranny.
 
66 The Quotations
From a shipside broadcast to the American people on arrival
in New York, December 11, 1930. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 238–239, for full text. Einstein
Archives 36-306
*I salute you and the soil of your country. I eagerly
look forward to renewing old friendships and to
broadening my understanding in the light of what I
shall see and learn while among you.
Ibid.
I feel that you are justified in looking into the future
with true assurance, because you have a mode of
living in which one finds the joy of life and the joy of
work harmoniously combined. Added to this is the
spirit of ambition which pervades your very being,
and seems to make the day’s work like a happy
child at play.
From a New Year’s Day greeting, in the New York Times,
January 1, 1931. Quoted in Stevenson’s Book of Quotations:
Classical and Modern. Einstein Readex 324 (not in archive
database)
Here in Pasadena it is like paradise. . . . Always sunshine
and fresh air, gardens with palm and pepper
trees, and friendly people who smile at one and ask
for autographs.
To the Lebach family during the days before smog, January
16, 1931, on the city in which the California Institute of
Technology is located. Einstein Archives 47-373
 
On America and Americans 67
[America], this land of contrasts and surprises,
which leaves one filled alternately with admiration
and incredulity. One feels more attached to the Old
Europe, with its heartaches and hardships, and is
glad to return there.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, February 9, 1931, revealing
a touch of homesickness during his three-month stay in
America. Einstein Archives 32-349
The smile on the faces of the people . . . is symbolic
of one of the greatest assets of the American. He is
friendly, self-confident, optimistic—and not envious.
From “Impressions of the U.S.A,” ca. 1931. Source misquoted
in Ideas and Opinions, 3. Einstein Archives 28-167
The American lives even more for his goals, for the
future, than the European. Life for him is always becoming,
never being. . . . He is less of an individualist
than the European . . . more emphasis is put on
the “we” than the “I.”
Ibid.
I have warm admiration for American institutes of
scientific research. We are unjust in attempting to ascribe
the increasing superiority of American research
work exclusively to superior wealth; devotion, patience,
a spirit of comradeship, and a talent for cooperation
play an important part in its success.
Ibid.
 
68 The Quotations
This proves that knowledge and justice are ranked
above power and wealth by a large section of the
human race.
Ibid. Einstein came to this conclusion because Americans
showed such reverence and respect for him, despite their
reputed materialism.
For the long term I would prefer being in Holland
rather than in America. . . . Besides having a handful
of really fine scholars, it is a boring and barren
society that would soon make you tremble.
To Paul Ehrenfest, April 3, 1932, after his return to Europe.
Einstein Archives 10-227
I am very happy at the prospect of becoming an
American citizen in another year. My desire to be a
citizen of a free republic has always been strong and
prompted me in my younger days to emigrate from
Germany to Switzerland.
From a statement issued on his sixtieth birthday. Science 89,
n.s. (1939), 242
*In America, the development of the individual and
his creative powers is possible, and that, to me, is
the most valuable asset in life.
From “I Am an American,” June 22, 1940. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 470. Einstein Archives
29-092
 
On America and Americans 69
*From what I have seen of Americans since I came
here, . . . they are not suited, either by temperament
or tradition, to live under a totalitarian system. I believe
that many of them would find life not worth
living under such circumstances. Hence, it is all the
more important for them to see to it that these liberties
be preserved and protected.
Ibid.
*I believe that America will prove that democracy is
not merely a form of government based on a sound
Constitution but is, in fact, a way of life tied to a
great tradition, the tradition of moral strength. Today
more than ever, the fate of the human race depends
upon the moral strength of human beings.
Ibid., 472
America is today the hope of all honorable men who
respect the rights of their fellow men and who believe
in the principles of freedom and justice.
From “Message for Germany,” dictated over the telephone
on December 7, 1941, the day Pearl Harbor was
bombed, to a White House correspondent. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 320. Einstein Archives
55-128
The only justifiable purpose of political institutions
is to assure the unhindered development of the
 
70 The Quotations
individual. . . . That is why I consider myself to be
particularly fortunate to be an American.
Ibid.
[The United States has] a government controlled to
a large extent by financiers, the mentality of whom
is near to the fascist frame of mind. If Hitler were
not a lunatic, he could easily have avoided the hostility
of the Western powers.
To Frank Kingdon, September 3, 1942. Einstein Archives
55-469
*In the United States everyone feels assured of his
worth as an individual. No one humbles himself before
another person or class. Even the great difference
in wealth, the superior power of a few cannot
undermine this healthy self-confidence and natural
respect for the dignity of one’s fellow-man.
From “Message to My Adopted Country,” Pageant 1, no. 12
(January 1946), 36–37. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 474; Jerome and Taylor, Einstein on Race and Racism,
140
The separation [between Jews and Gentiles] is even
more pronounced [in America] than it ever was anywhere
in Western Europe, including Germany.
To Hans Muehsam, March 24, 1948. Einstein Archives
38-371
 
On America and Americans 71
I hardly ever felt as alienated from people as I do
right now. . . . The worst is that nowhere is there
anything with which one can identify. Brutality and
lies are everywhere.
To Gertrud Warschauer, July 15, 1950, about the McCarthy
era. Einstein Archives 39-505
The German calamity of years ago repeats itself:
people acquiesce without resistance and align themselves
with the forces of evil.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, January 6, 1951, about McCarthyism
in America. Einstein Archives 32-400
I have become a kind of enfant terrible in my new
homeland because of my inability to keep silent and
swallow everything that happens here.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 28, 1954. Einstein
Archives 32-410
ON HIS ADOPTED HOMETOWN OF PRINCETON,
NEW JERSEY
I found Princeton lovely: an as yet unsmoked pipe,
so fresh, so young.
Quoted in the New York Times, July 8, 1921, reporting on his
lecture trip to his future hometown
 
72 The Quotations
Princeton is a wondrous little spot, a quaint and ceremonious
village of puny demigods on stilts. Yet, by
ignoring certain social conventions, I have been able
to create for myself an atmosphere conducive to
study and free from distraction.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, November 20, 1933. Einstein
Archives 32-369
To an elderly man society here remains intrinsically
foreign.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, February 16, 1935. Einstein
Archives 32-385
I am very happy with my new home in friendly
America and in the liberal atmosphere of Princeton.
From an interview, Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384,
413
I am privileged by fate to live here in Princeton as if
on an island that . . . resembles the charming palace
garden in Laeken [Belgium]. Into this small university
town the chaotic voices of human strife barely
penetrate. I am almost ashamed to be living in such
a place while all the rest struggle and suffer.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 20, 1936. Einstein
Archives 32-387
In the face of all the heavy burdens I have borne in
recent years, I feel doubly thankful that there has
 
On America and Americans 73
fallen on my lot in Princeton University a place for
work and a scientific atmosphere which could not
be better or more harmonious.
To university president Harold Dodds, January 14, 1937. At
the time, Einstein’s offi ce was temporarily located on the
Princeton campus even though he was a member of the Institute
for Advanced Study, a separate institution whose
campus had not yet been built. Part of this message is inscribed
on the Einstein statue in Princeton. Einstein Archives
52-823
The Marquand estate is now a public park, and because
today was Sunday and I didn’t go to the Institute,
I took a walk there—it’s so close by, and so
beautiful.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” May 8,
1954
A banishment to paradise.
On going to Princeton. Quoted in Sayen, Einstein in America,
64
You are surprised, aren’t you, at the contrast between
my fame throughout the world . . . and the
isolation and quiet in which I live here. I wished for
this isolation all my life, and now I have fi nally
achieved it here in Princeton.
Quoted in Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, 297
 
 
On and to Children
 
 
Let me tell you what I look like: pale face, long hair,
and a tiny start of a paunch. In addition, an awkward
gait, and a cigar in the mouth . . . and a pen in
pocket or hand. But crooked legs and warts he does
not have, and so is quite handsome—also there’s no
hair on his hands, as is so often the case with ugly
men. So it really is a pity that you didn’t see me.
From a postcard to eight-year-old cousin Elisabeth Ney,
who felt neglected because she wasn’t invited for a visit
with Einstein along with her parents, September 30, 1920.
In Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein, 113. CPAE, Vol. 10,
Doc. 157
*Dear young man: In your article you were quite
right in stating that motion can be experienced and
presented by us only as relative motion. . . . But until
the presentation of relativity theory, it was thought
that the concept of absolute motion was necessary
for the formulation of the laws of motion. . . . But it
would be better if you began to teach others only
after you yourself have learned something.
To Arthur Cohen, age twelve, who had submitted a paper
to Einstein, December 26, 1928. Einstein Archives 42-547.
Cohen’s sister-in-law, Betty, contacted me after reading this
quotation. Young Arthur eventually went to Stanford, then
received a Ph.D. in botany from Harvard, and became a
professor at Washington State University.
*Dear little cousin: You are not the most savvy little
customer, but it’s good that you’re at least a curious
 
78 The Quotations
young fellow. So then: The soup doesn’t cool down
as much because the layer of fat on the top makes
evaporation more difficult and thereby also slows
the cooling.
To an inquisitive child, name unknown, January 13, 1930.
See Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein, 121. Einstein Archives
42-592
*To the schoolchildren of Japan: . . . I myself have
visited your beautiful country, its cities, houses, its
mountains and forests, from which Japanese youngsters
derive a love for their homeland. On my table
lies a large book full of colorful pictures drawn by
Japanese children. . . . Remember that ours is the
fi rst era in which it has been possible for people of
different nations to conduct their affairs in a friendly
and understanding manner. . . . May the spirit of
brotherly understanding . . . continue to grow. . . . I,
an old man, . . . hope that your generation will some
day put mine to shame.
Written in fall 1930. In Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein,
122–123. Einstein Archives 42-594
*My dear young people: Bear in mind the fact that
the wonderful things which you come to know in
your schools are the product of many generations . . .
accomplished in enthusiastic struggle and with great
effort in all countries of the earth. All this is now
laid in your hands as your inheritance, to the end
that you may receive, honor, and advance it and
 
On and to Children 79
some day faithfully convey it to your posterity . . .
If you will constantly keep this in mind, you will
fi nd a meaning in life and effort and will attain
the right attitude toward other peoples and other
times.
From a speech at Pasadena City College, February 26, 1931.
As published in Pasadena Star News, February 26, 1931, and
Pasadena Chronicle, February 27, 1931. Differently translated
in Mein Weltbild, 25. See also further information about this
speech in the section “On Education, Students, and Academic
Freedom.”
*Despite the natural presumption that life in some
form may not be unique to our planet, the notion is
beyond the current realm of knowledge.
To Dick Emmons, a sixteen-year-old amateur astronomer
who later became a longtime member of Operation Moonwatch,
a Smithsonian-sponsored organization started in
1956 to help track artificial satellites, November 11, 1935.
Smithsonian Institution Archives, Richard Emmons Collection,
Record Unit 08-112, Box 1. Also see Patrick McCray,
Keep Watching the Skies! (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2008), 35. Einstein Archives 92-381
*Dear Children: With pleasure I can picture you
children gathered all together during the holidays,
united by a harmonious spirit instilled by the warm
glow of Christmas lights. But also remember the lessons
taught by the one whose birthday you are celebrating.
. . . Learn to be happy through the good fortunes
and joys of your friends and not through
senseless quarrels. . . . Your burden will seem lighter
 
80 The Quotations
or more bearable to you, you will find your own
way through patience, and you will spread joy
everywhere.
In response to a school’s request for a meaningful Christmas
message, December 20, 1935. In Calaprice, Dear Professor
Einstein, 134–135. Einstein Archives 42-598
*Dear Phyllis: . . . Scientists believe that every occurrence,
including the affairs of human beings, is due
to the laws of nature. Therefore a scientist cannot be
inclined to believe that the course of events can be
infl uenced by prayer. . . . But also, everyone who is
seriously involved in the pursuit of science becomes
convinced that some spirit is manifest in the laws of
the universe, one that is vastly superior to that of
man. In this way the pursuit of science leads to a religious
feeling of a special sort.
To Phyllis Wright, January 24, 1936. In Calaprice, Dear Professor
Einstein, 128–129. Einstein Archives 42-602
*Dear Barbara: I was very pleased with your kind
letter. Until now I never dreamed to be something
like a hero. But since you have given me the nomination,
I feel that I am one. . . . Do not worry about
your difficulties in mathematics; I can assure you
that mine are still greater.
To junior high school student Barbara Wilson, January 7,
1943. In Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein, 140. Einstein Archives
42-606
 
On and to Children 81
*Dear Hugh: There is no such thing like an irresistible
force and immovable body. But there seems to
be a very stubborn boy who has forced his way victoriously
through strange difficulties created by
himself for this purpose.
To Hugh Everett III, June 11, 1943. Hugh’s letter is not in
the archive, so there is no further background information.
Einstein Archives 89-878
*Dear Myfanwy: . . . I have to apologize to you that I
am still among the living. There will be a remedy for
this, however. Be not worried about “curved space.”
You will understand [it] at a later time. . . . Used in
the right sense the word “curved” has not exactly
the same meaning as in everyday language. . . .
I hope that [your] future atsronomical investigations
will not be discovered anymore by the eyes and ears
of your school government.
To Myfanwy Williams in South Africa, who confi ded that
she thought Einstein was dead, and that she and her
friends secretly used a telescope after lights-out at her
boarding school, August 25, 1946. Her fi rst name had been
wrongly transcribed as “Tyfanny”—thanks to Barbara
Wolff of the Einstein Archives for the correction. In Calaprice,
Dear Professor Einstein, 153. Einstein Archives 42-612
*I do not mind that you are a girl. But the main thing
is that you yourself do not mind. There is no reason
for it.
From another letter to Myfanwy, September–October 1946.
Einstein had mistaken her name for a boy’s, and she wrote
 
82 The Quotations
back explaining she’s a girl, something she had “always regretted”
but had become “resigned to.” In Calaprice, Dear
Professor Einstein, 156. Einstein Archives 42-614
*Dear Monique: There has been an earth since a little
more than a billion years. As for the question of the
end of it I advise: Wait and see! . . . I enclose a few
stamps for your collection.
To Monique Epstein in New York, June 19, 1951. In Calaprice,
Dear Professor Einstein, 174–175. Einstein Archives
42-647
*Dear Children: . . . Without sunlight there is: no
wheat, no bread, no grass, no cattle, no meat, no
milk, and everything would be frozen. No life.
To “Six Little Scientists” in Louisiana, December 12, 1951.
In Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein, 187. Einstein Archives
42-652
*As an old schoolmaster I received with great joy
and pride the nomination to the office of Rectorship
of your Society. Despite my being an old gypsy there
is a tendency to respectability inherent in old age—
also with me. . . . I am a little (but not too much) bewildered
. . . that this nomination was made independent
of my consent.
To Sixth Form Society, Newcastle-under-Tyne, March 17,
1952. Einstein Archives 42-660
 
On and to Children 83
*You young people should consider yourselves fortunate
that you . . . have the opportunity to exchange
viewpoints and ideas with those of a variety of cultural
backgrounds. There is no better opportunity to
acquire the lifelong insights that are necessary for the
resolution of international problems and conflicts.
From a message to Friendship among Children and Youth
in Austria, November 22, 1952. In Calaprice, Dear Professor
Einstein, 203. Einstein Archives 42-667.1
*Dear Children: . . . We call something an animal
which has certain characteristics: it takes nourishment,
it descends from parents similar to itself,
it grows, it moves by itself, it dies if its time has
run out. . . . Think about [humans] in the abovementioned
way and then decide for yourselves
whether it is a natural thing to regard ourselves as
animals.
To children of Westview School, January 17, 1953. In
Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein, 206. Einstein Archives
42-673
*Your gift will be an appropriate suggestion to be a
little more elegant in the future . . . because neckties
and cuffs exist for me only as remote memories.
To children of Farmingdale, N.Y., Elementary School,
March 26, 1955, less than a month before his death. In Calaprice,
Dear Professor Einstein, 219–220. Einstein Archives
42-711
 
TO HIS OWN YOUNG CHILDREN
(SEE ALSO “ABOUT AND TO HIS CHILDREN”
UNDER “FAMILY”)
Nowhere else is it as nice for boys as in Zurich. . . .
Boys aren’t pestered too much with homework
there, nor with the need to be too well dressed and
well mannered.
To son Hans Albert, after the boys returned to Zurich with
their mother, January 25, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 48
Today I’m sending off some toys for you and Tete.
Don’t neglect your piano, my Adn; you don’t know
how much pleasure you can give to others, as well
as to yourself, when you can play music nicely. . . .
Another thing, brush your teeth every day, and if a
tooth is not quite all right, go to the dentist immediately.
I also do the same and am now very happy
that I have healthy teeth. This is very important, as
you will realize yourself later on.
To Hans Albert (“Adn,” earlier mistranscribed in the archive
as “Adu”; “Tete” is Eduard), ca. April 1915. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 70. In a letter later that year he urges the two
boys to take calcium chloride after every meal to promote
strong tooth and bone development.
I’ll try to be together with you for a month every
year so that you will have a father who is close to
 
On and to Children 85
you and can love you. You can also learn a lot of
good things from me that no one else can offer you
so easily. The things I’ve gained from so much strenuous
work should be of value not only to strangers
but especially to my own boys. In the last few days
I completed one of the finest papers of my life. When
you’re older I’ll tell you about it.
To eleven-year-old Hans Albert, November 4, 1915, also referring
to his paper on the general theory of relativity.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 134
On the piano, play mainly the things that you enjoy,
even if your teacher doesn’t assign them to you. You
learn the most from things that you enjoy doing so
much that you don’t even notice that the time is
passing. Often I’m so engrossed in my work that I
forget to eat lunch.
Ibid.
I’m very glad that you enjoy the piano so much. I
have one in my little apartment, too, and play it
every day. I also play the violin a lot. Maybe you can
practice something to accompany a violin, and then
we can play at Easter when we’re together.
To Hans Albert, March 11, 1916. Einstein was not able to
come at Christmas because of the diffi culty of crossing borders
during wartime, so he planned a trip at Easter. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 199
 
86 The Quotations
You still make so many writing errors. You must
take care in that regard: it makes a bad impression
when words are misspelled.
To Hans Albert, March 16, 1916. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 202
I’m writing you now for the third time without receiving
a reply from you. Don’t you remember your
father anymore? Are we never going to see each
other again?
To Hans Albert, September 26, 1916. Einstein learned that
the boys had become angry with him. They reconciled and
continued to write occasionally, while Einstein visited
about once a year during wartime. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 261;
see also Doc. 258
Don’t worry about your marks. Just make sure that
you keep up with the work and that you don’t have
to repeat a year. It is not necessary to have good
marks in everything.
To Hans Albert, October 13, 1916. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 263
Although I’m over here, you do have a father who
loves you more than anything else and who is constantly
thinking of you and caring about you.
Ibid., regarding their separation
*It hurts me often, too, that I have so little of both of
you, but I’m a very busy man and can’t get away
much from here. The two of us have been together
 
On and to Children 87
so rarely that I hardly know you at all, even though
I’m your father. I’m sure you have only a quite
vague impression of me, too.
To Eduard Einstein, August 1, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 96
*No father can be treated the way Albert’s letter
treated me. His letter is full of mistrust, lack of respect,
and a nasty attitude toward me. I truly did
not deserve that and will not put up with it.
To Eduard Einstein, July 15, 1923, after a continuing tiff
with Hans Albert, who had faithfully sided with his
mother during separation and divorce. Einstein Archives
75-627
*I dislike very much that my children should be
taught something that is contrary to all scientifi c
thinking.
Recalled by Philipp Frank in Einstein: His Life and Times, 280,
about Einstein’s children’s religious education
 
 
On Death
 
 
I have firmly resolved to bite the dust, when my time
comes, with a minimum of medical assistance, and
up to then I will sin to my wicked heart’s content.
To Elsa Einstein, August 11, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 466
This life is not such that we ought to complain when
it comes to an end for us or for a loved one; rather,
we may look back in satisfaction when it has been
bravely and honorably withstood.
To Ida Hurwitz, November 22, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 172
The old who have died live on in the young ones.
Don’t you feel this now in your bereavement, when
you look at your children?
To Hedwig Born, June 18, 1920, after the death of her
mother. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 28–29 (date therein
wrongly given as April 18). CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 59
Our death is not an end if we have lived on in our
children and the younger generation. For they are
us; our bodies are only wilted leaves on the tree of
life.
To the widow of Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes,
February 25, 1926. Einstein Archives 14-389
Death is a reality. . . . Life ends definitely when
the subject, by his actions, no longer affects his
 
92 The Quotations
environment. . . . He can no longer add an iota to
the sum total of his experience.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means
to Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 444–445
Neither on my deathbed nor before will I ask myself
such a question. Nature is not an engineer or a contractor,
and I myself am a part of Nature.
In answer to a question concerning what facts would determine
if his life was a success or failure, November 12, 1930.
Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human
Side, 92. Einstein Archives 45-751
One lives one’s life under constant tension, until it is
time to go for good.
To his sister, Maja, August 31, 1935. Quoted in Einstein: A
Portrait, 42. Einstein Archives 29-417
It should be of comfort to you that a sudden farewell
to this best of all worlds is something that one
must wish for a loved one above all, so that things
don’t happen as in Haydn’s Farewell Symphony,
where one instrument of the orchestra vanishes after
another.
To Boris Schwarz, on the death of his father, 1945. Quoted
in Holton and Elkana, Albert Einstein: Historical and Cultural
Perspectives, 416. Einstein Archives 79-678
 
On Death 93
Is there not a certain satisfaction in the fact that
natural limits are set to the life of the individual,
so that at its conclusion it may appear as a work
of art?
Quoted in “Paul Langevin,” La Pensée, n.s., no 12 (May–
June 1947), 13–14. Einstein Archives 5-150
*The death of our closest relatives reopens old childhood
wounds. . . . It is left to each of us to deal with
our share of these alone.
To Hans Albert Einstein, August 4, 1948. Einstein Archives
75-836
I feel unable to participate in your projected TV
broadcast “The Last Two Minutes.” It seems to me
not so relevant how people are to spend the last two
minutes before their fi nal deliverance.
In answer to a request that he participate in a television
program on how some famous people would spend the
last two minutes of their lives, August 26, 1950. Einstein
Archives 60-684
I myself should also be dead already, but I am still
here.
To E. Schaerer-Meyer, July 27, 1951. Einstein Archives
60-525
Brief is this existence, like a brief visit in a strange
house. The path to be pursued is poorly lit by a
 
94 The Quotations
 flickering consciousness whose center is the limiting
and separating “I.” . . . When a group of individuals
becomes a “we,” a harmonious whole, they have
reached as high as humans can reach.
Obituary for physicist Rudolf Ladenburg, April 1952.
See Stern, Einstein’s German World, 163. Einstein Archives
5-160
*Man stands powerless before all the tragedies that
are allotted to him. . . . But all the suffering unites us
with those . . . with whom we so seldom have an
opportunity to share a small part of our lives. . . .
With my heart I touch your hand.
To Gerhard Fankhauser, a professor of biology at Princeton,
whose wife died in a car accident. Einstein also asked
that Fankhauser’s young children visit him at home.
November 10, 1954. Sent to me by Robin Remy, whose
mother inherited a copy of the original. Einstein Archives
59-630
To one bent on age, death will come as a release.
I feel this quite strongly now that I have grown
old myself and have come to regard death like an
old debt, at long last to be discharged. Still, instinctively
one does everything possible to postpone the
fi nal settlement. Such is the game that Nature plays
with us.
To Gertrud Warschauer, February 5, 1955. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 616. Einstein Archives
39-532
 
On Death 95
I want to go when I want. It is tasteless to prolong
life artificially. I have done my share; it is time to go.
I will do it elegantly.
Quoted by Helen Dukas in her letter to Abraham Pais, an
Einstein biographer, April 30, 1955. See Pais, Subtle Is the
Lord, 477. (Helen Dukas’s version in her own account of
Einstein’s last days is slightly different: “How undignifi ed
[to undergo the proposed surgery]. I’m going when I want
to go—elegantly!” See Calaprice, The New Quotable Einstein,
appendix, for an English translation of the account, or Einstein
Archives 39-071 for the original German.)
Look into nature, and then you will understand it
better.
Quoted by Margot Einstein in a letter to Carl Seelig, May 8,
1955. Thanks to Barbara Wolff for this new source.
I feel such solidarity with all those alive that it is immaterial
to me where the individual begins and
where he ends.
Quoted by Max Born, Physik im Wandel meiner Zeit (Wiesbaden,
Germany: Vieweg, 1957), 240. First mentioned by
Hedi Born in a letter of 1926 or 1927, where she says that
Einstein made the remark when he was critically ill.
This house will never become a place of pilgrimage
where the pilgrims come to look at the bones of the
saint.
In reply to a student’s question on what would become of
his house after his death. Recalled by John Wheeler in
 
96 The Quotations
French, Einstein, 22; also in Wheeler, “Mentor and Sounding
Board,” in Brockman, ed., My Einstein, 35
I want to be cremated so people won’t come to worship
at my bones.
Quoted by Einstein biographer Abraham Pais, Manchester
Guardian, December 17, 1994. Most likely this is a paraphrase
of Einstein’s spoken wishes.
 
On Education, Students, and
Academic Freedom
 
 
An organization cannot in itself engender intellectual
activity, but rather can only support what is already
in existence.
To Rudolf Lindemann, October 7, 1919, regarding the forming
of student associations to replace fraternities and their
“barbaric traditions.” CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 125
The inclination of the pupil for a particular profession
must not be neglected, especially because such
inclination usually asserts itself at an early age,
being occasioned by personal gifts, by example of
other members of the family, and by various other
circumstances.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein, 65
Most teachers waste their time by asking questions
that are intended to discover what a pupil does not
know, whereas the true art of questioning is to discover
what the pupil does know or is capable of
knowing.
Ibid.
*I was astonished at the close friendships between
your faculty and students—a condition rarely seen
or even possible in German institutions.
From an address at City College of New York, April 21,
1921. Quoted in The Campus (CCNY), April 26, 1921, 1, 2.
See also Illy, Albert Meets America, 114
 
100 The Quotations
*Studying, and striving for truth and beauty in general,
is a sphere in which we are allowed to be children
throughout life.
Dedication to Adriana Enriques, ca. October 22, 1921. Einstein
Archives 36-588
In the matter of physics [education], the first lessons
should contain nothing but what is experimental
and interesting to see.
From “Einstein on Education,” Nation and Athenaeum, December
3, 1921. The unnamed author is quoting from Moszkowski,
Conversations with Einstein, 69
It is not so very important for a person to learn facts.
For that he does not really need college. He can learn
them from books. The value of an education in a liberal
arts college is not the learning of many facts, but
the training of the mind to think something that
cannot be learned from textbooks.
Written in 1921, on Thomas Edison’s opinion that a college
education is useless. Quoted in Frank, Einstein: His Life and
Times, 185
It is the supreme art of the teacher to awaken joy in
creative expression and knowledge.
Translation of the quotation on a plaque in the astronomy
building of Pasadena City College (the German inscription
reads “Es ist die wichtigste Kunst des Lehrers, die Freude
am Schaffen und am Erkennen zu wecken”). Einstein dedicated
the building and its observatory on February 26,
 
On Education, Students, Academic Freedom 101
1931, with a short speech, and also contributed the above
words to be inscribed on the small bronze dedicatory
plaque inside the building. The elaborate ceremony was attended
by most Pasadena schoolchildren as well. See Pasadena
Star News, February 26, 1931, and Pasadena Chronicle,
February 27, 1931 (thanks to Dan Haley, Shelley Erwin, and
Mane Hakopyan of PCC for these references and copies of
the articles). It is not clear if these words are original to
Einstein, as Dan Haley, research librarian at Pasadena City
College, found a similar statement written by Anatole
France in The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard, part 2, chapter 4:
“The art of teaching is only the art of awakening the natural
curiosity of young minds for the purpose of satisfying it
afterwards,” which, I discovered, dates back to 1881. No
doubt other people have had the same thought through the
centuries and the concept is not original to France, either.
This sentence is also used as the epigram in Mein Weltbild
(1934), 25, in the reprinting of Einstein’s dedication speech;
here it is also not clear if these words are Einstein’s own or
if he is using an unsourced quotation by someone else, but
my feeling is they are his own. See also the next quotation,
written three years later.
*The most valuable thing a teacher can impart to
children is not knowledge and understanding per se
but a longing for knowledge and understanding,
and an appreciation for intellectual values, whether
they be artistic, scientifi c, or moral.
Similar to the preceding quotation, but written for the National
Council of Supervisors of Elementary Science in
1934. Einstein Archives 28-277
*Numerous are the academic chairs, but rare are
wise and noble teachers. Numerous and large are
 
102 The Quotations
the lecture halls, but far from numerous the young
people who genuinely thirst for truth and justice.
Numerous are the wares that nature produces by
the dozen, but her choice products are few.
From “On Academic Freedom,” April 28, 1931. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 464. Einstein Archives
28-151
*Today also there is an urge toward social progress,
toward tolerance and freedom of thought, toward a
larger political unity. . . . But the students at our universities
have ceased as completely as their teachers
to embody the hopes and ideals of the people.
Ibid.
Specialization in every sphere of intellectual work is
producing an ever-widening gulf between the intellectual
worker and the non-specialist, which makes
it more difficult for the life of the nation to be fertilized
and enriched by the achievements of art and
science.
From “Congratulations to Dr. Solf,” October 25, 1932. Reprinted
in The World as I See It, 20
*There are certain occupations, even in modern society,
which entail living in isolation and do not require
great physical or intellectual effort. Such occupations
as the service of lighthouses and lightships
come to mind. Would it not be possible to place
 
On Education, Students, Academic Freedom 103
young people who wish to think about scientifi c
problems, especially of a mathematical or philosophical
nature, in such occupations? Very few young
people with such ambitions have, even during the
most productive period of their lives, the opportunity
to devote themselves undisturbed for any length
of time to problems of a scientifi c nature.
From a speech in the Royal Albert Hall, “Science and Civilization,”
October 3, 1933. Published in 1934 as “Europe’s
Danger—Europe’s Hope.” See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 280. Einstein Archives 28-253
Never regard your study as a duty, but as the enviable
opportunity to learn the liberating beauty of
the intellect for your own personal joy and for the
profi t of the community to which your later work
will belong.
From a statement given to the Princeton University freshman
publication, The Dink, December 1933. Einstein Archives
28-257
In the teaching of geography and history, a sympathetic
understanding [should] be fostered for the
characteristics of the different peoples of the world,
especially for those whom we are in the habit of describing
as “primitive.”
From “Education and World Peace,” message to the conference
of the Progressive Education Association, November 23,
1934. Published in Progressive Education 9 (1934), 440; reprinted
in Ideas and Opinions, 58
 
104 The Quotations
In the schools, history should be used as a means of
interpreting progress in civilization, and not for inculcating
ideals of imperialistic power and military
success.
Ibid.
Humiliation and mental oppression by ignorant and
selfi sh teachers wreak havoc in the youthful mind
that can never be undone and often exert a baleful
infl uence in later life.
From “Paul Ehrenfest in Memoriam.” Reprinted in Out of
My Later Years (1934), 214–217. Einstein Archives 5-136
To me the worst thing seems to be for a school principally
to work with the methods of fear, force, and
artificial authority. Such treatment destroys the sound
sentiments, the sincerity, and the self-confidence of
the pupil.
From an address at the celebration of the tercentenary of
higher education in America at the State University of New
York in Albany, October 15, 1936. In School and Society 44
(1936), 589–592. Published as “On Education,” in Ideas and
Opinions, 62. Einstein Archives 29-080
The aim [of education] must be the training of independently
acting and thinking individuals who,
however, see in the service to the community their
highest life achievement.
Ibid., 60
 
On Education, Students, Academic Freedom 105
The school should always have as its aim that the
young person leave it as a harmonious personality,
not as a specialist.
Ibid., 64. The next quotation, written sixteen years later, reveals
what might otherwise happen.
Otherwise, he—with his specialized knowledge—
more closely resembles a well-trained dog than a
harmoniously developed person.
From an interview with Benjamin Fine, New York Times, October
5, 1952. Reprinted as “Education for Independent
Thought” in Ideas and Opinions, 66. Einstein Archives
60-723
Freedom of teaching and of opinion in book or press
is the foundation for the sound and natural development
of any people.
From an address written for a gathering of university
teachers that never took place, 1936. Published as “At a
Gathering for Freedom of Opinion” in Out of My Later
Years, 183–184; Einstein Archives 28-333
The real difficulty, the difficulty that has baffled the
sages of all times, is this: how can we make our
teaching so potent in the emotional life of man that
its influence should withstand the pressure of the
elemental psychic forces in the individual?
From an address at Swarthmore College, June 6, 1938. Published
as “Morals and Emotions” in Out of My Later Years.
Einstein Archives 29-083
 
106 The Quotations
*Only understanding for our neighbors, justice in
our own dealings, and willingness to help our fellow
men can give human society permanence and
assure security for the individual. Neither intelligence
nor inventions nor institutions can serve as
substitutes for these most vital parts of education.
From a CBS radio address for the United Jewish Appeal,
March 21, 1939. See also Jerome, Einstein on Israel and Zionism,
141. Einstein Archives 28-475
The school of life is chaotic and planless, while the
school system operates according to a defi nite
plan. . . . That explains . . . why education is such an
important political instrument: there is always the
danger that it may become an object of exploitation
by contending political groups.
From a message to the New Jersey Education Association,
Atlantic City, November 10, 1939. Published in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 389. Einstein Archives
70-486
*It is a very grave mistake to think that the joy of
seeing and searching can be promoted by means of
coercion and a sense of duty. . . . I believe that it
would be possible to rob even a healthy beast of
prey of its voraciouslness . . . with the aid of a whip,
to force the beast to devour continuously, even when
not hungry.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 17–19
 
On Education, Students, Academic Freedom 107
The crippling of individuals I consider the worst
evil of capitalism. Our whole educational system
suffers from this evil. An exaggerated competitive
attitude is inculcated into the student, who is trained
to worship material success as a preparation for his
future career.
From “Why Socialism?” Monthly Review, May 1949. See
Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 445
*The education of the individual, in addition to promoting
his innate abilities, would attempt to develop
in him a sense of responsibility for his fellow
men in place of the glorification of power and success
in our present society.
On education in a socialist system. Ibid., 445–446
It is in fact nothing short of a miracle that modern
methods of instruction have not yet entirely strangled
the holy curiosity of inquiry; for this delicate
little plant, aside from stimulation, stands mainly in
need of freedom; without this it goes to wrack and
ruin without fail.
Ibid., 17
Teaching should be such that what is offered is perceived
as a valuable gift and not as a hard duty.
From an interview with Benjamin Fine, New York Times, October
5, 1952. Reprinted as “Education for Independent
 
108 The Quotations
Thought” in Ideas and Opinions, 66. Einstein Archives
60-723
I never had the chance to teach youngsters. A pity. I
would actually have liked to teach high school.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” October
17, 1953
By academic freedom I understand the right to
search for truth and to publish and teach what one
holds to be true. This right also implies a duty: one
must not conceal any part of what one has recognized
to be true. It is evident that any restriction
of academic freedom acts in such a way as to hamper
the dissemination of knowledge among the
people and thereby impedes rational judgment and
action.
From a statement for a conference of the Emergency Civil
Liberties Committee, March 13, 1954. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 551. Facsimile in Cahn, Einstein,
97. Einstein Archives 28-1025
I am opposed to examinations—they only deter
from the interest in studying. No more than two
exams should be given throughout a student’s [college]
career. I would hold seminars, and if the young
people are interested and listen, I would give them
a diploma.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” January
20, 1955
 
On Education, Students, Academic Freedom 109
You should try to remember that a dedicated teacher
is a valuable messenger from the past, and can be an
escort to your future.
Response to a student who complained about his teacher.
Quoted by Richards, Einstein as I Knew Him, Postscript
 
 
On and to Friends, Specifi c
Scientists, and Others
 
 
On Michele Besso (1873–1955)
Now he has departed from this strange world a little
ahead of me. That signifies nothing. For those of us
who believe in physics, the distinction between past,
present, and future is only a stubbornly persistent
illusion.
On lifelong friend Michele Besso, in a letter of condolence
to the Besso family, March 21, 1955, less than a month before
his own death. Einstein Archives 7-245
What I admired most in him as a human being
is that he managed to live for so many years not
only in peace but also in lasting harmony with a
woman—an undertaking in which I twice failed
rather miserably.
Ibid.
On Niels Bohr (1885–1962)
Not often in my life has a person given me such joy
by his presence as you have. . . . I’m studying your
great papers now, and when I get stuck somewhere
I have the pleasure of seeing your kindly, boyish
face before me, smiling and explaining.
To Niels Bohr, the Danish physicist and future Nobel laureate
(1922), May 2, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 4
 
114 The Quotations
Bohr was here, and I’m as enamored of him as you
are. He is like an extremely sensitive child who
moves around in this world in a sort of trance.
To Paul Ehrenfest, May 4, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 6
What is so marvelously attractive about Bohr as a
scientifi c thinker is his rare blend of boldness and
caution; seldom has anyone possessed such an intuitive
grasp of hidden things combined with such a
strong critical sense. . . . He is unquestionably one of
the greatest discoverers of our age in the scientifi c
fi eld.
From “Niels Bohr,” February 1922, published in Einstein,
The World as I See It (1934). Einstein Archives 8-062
He is truly a man of genius. . . . I have full confi -
dence in his way of thinking.
To Paul Ehrenfest, March 23, 1922. Einstein Archives
10-035
*That [Bohr could] discover the major laws of the
spectral lines and of the electron-shells of the atoms
together with their significance for chemistry appears
to me like a miracle. . . . This is the highest
form of musicality in the sphere of thought.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 47
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 115
On Max Born (1882–1970)
Born became a pensioner in Edinburgh, and his pension
is so small that he couldn’t afford to live in England
and had to move to Germany.
On the German physicist whom Einstein admired. Born
won the Nobel Prize in 1954, which may have helped his
fi nancial circumstances. Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations
with Einstein,” November 2, 1953
On Louis Brandeis (1856–1941)
I know of no other person who combines such profound
intellectual gifts with such self-renunciation
while finding the whole meaning of his life in quiet
service to the community.
To Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, November 10,
1936. Einstein Archives 35-046
On Pablo Casals (1876–1973)
What I admire in him particularly is his steadfast
demeanor not only against the oppressors of his
people, but against all those opportunists who are
always ready to make a pact with the devil. He has
clearly recognized that the world is more threatened
 
116 The Quotations
by those who tolerate evil or support it than the evildoers
themselves.
Written March 30, 1953. Einstein admired the Spanish cellist
not only for his music, but for his humanism and
staunch opposition to the fascist Franco regime in Spain.
Einstein Archives 34-347
On Charlie Chaplin (1889–1977)
[He] had set up a Japanese theater in his home, with
authentic Japanese dances being performed by Japanese
girls. Just as in his films, Chaplin is an enchanting
person.
To the Lebach family, January 16, 1931, after visiting the
fi lm actor in Hollywood. (Later in the month, Einstein attended
the premiere of Chaplin’s City Lights with him.)
Einstein Archives 47-373
*Even Chaplin looks at me like I’m some kind of exotic
creature and doesn’t know what to make of me.
In my room he acted as if he were being brought
into a temple.
Recalled by Konrad Wachsmann, as quoted in Grüning,
Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 145
On Marie Curie (1867–1934)
I do not believe Mme Curie is power-hungry or hungry
for whatever. She is an unpretentious, honest
person with more than her share of responsibilities
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 117
and burdens. She has a sparkling intelligence, but
despite her passionate nature she is not attractive
enough to present a danger to anyone.
To Heinrich Zangger, November 7, 1911, regarding the
French-Polish physicist and Nobel laureate’s (1903, physics;
1911, chemistry) alleged affair with married French
physicist Paul Langevin. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 303
I am compelled to tell you how much I have come to
admire your intellect, your vitality, and your honesty,
and that I consider myself fortunate to have
made your personal acquaintance in Brussels.
To Marie Curie, November 23, 1911. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc.
312a, embedded in Vol. 8
I am deeply grateful to you and your friends that
you so cordially allowed me to participate in your
daily life. To witness such marvelous camaraderie
among such people is the most uplifting thing I can
think of. Everything looked so natural and uncomplicated
with you, like a good work of art. . . . I wish
to ask your forgiveness if by any chance my crude
manners sometimes made you feel uncomfortable.
To Marie Curie, April 3, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 435
Madame Curie is very intelligent but short on emotion
[Häringseele], meaning that she is deficient in
feelings of joy and pain. Almost the only way she
expresses her feelings is to rail against things she
 
118 The Quotations
doesn’t like. And she has a daughter who is even
worse—like a grenadier. This daughter is also very
gifted.
To Elsa Löwenthal, ca. August 11, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 465
*I would not dare grumble to you in this fashion if I
did not think of you as a sister in defiance, one who,
somewhere in her soul, has always had an understanding
of such feelings, and one to whom I have
always felt particularly close.
To Marie Curie, December 25, 1923, while complaining to
her about the League of Nations and giving his reasons for
resigning from its Committee on Intellectual Cooperation.
He rejoined six months later. See also Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 196. Einstein Archives 8-431
Her strength, her purity of will, her austerity toward
herself, her objectivity, her incorruptible judgment—
all these were of a kind seldom found in a single individual.
. . . Once she had recognized a certain way
as a right one, she pursued it without compromise
and with extreme tenacity.
At the Curie memorial celebration, Roerich Museum, New
York, November 23, 1934. Einstein Archives 5-142
On Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933)
His sense of inadequacy, objectively unjustifi ed,
plagued him incessantly, often robbing him of the
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 119
peace of mind necessary for tranquil research. . . .
His tragedy lay precisely in an almost morbid lack of
self-confidence. . . . The strongest relationship in his
life was that toward his wife and fellow worker . . .
his intellectual equal. . . . He repaid her with a veneration
and love such as I have not often witnessed
in my life.
From “Paul Ehrenfest in Memoriam,” written after the
physicist and close friend’s suicide, 1934. Ehrenfest had
shot his sixteen-year-old son, Vassik, who had Down syndrome,
in the waiting room of the institute where he was
being treated. Then he shot himself. Reprinted in Out of
My Later Years, 214–217. Einstein Archives 5-136
He was not only the best teacher in our profession
whom I have ever known; he was also passionately
preoccupied with the development and destiny
of people, especially his students. To understand
others, to gain their friendship and trust, to aid anyone
embroiled in outer or inner struggles, to encourage
youthful talent—all this was his real element,
almost more than his immersion in scientifi c
problems.
Ibid.
On Dwight D. Eisenhower (1890–1969)
Eisenhower said on the radio, “One can’t win
peace with military might.” I found this remarkable.
 
120 The Quotations
Eisenhower is good—he is advising Americans not
to get mixed up in Chinese politics.
On the thirty-fourth U.S. president (served 1953–1961).
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” November
13, 1953
On Michael Faraday (1791–1867)
This man loved mysterious Nature as a lover loves
his distant beloved. . . . [In Faraday’s day] there did
not yet exist the dull specialization that, through
horn-rimmed glasses and arrogance, destroys the
poetry.
On the English chemist and physicist. To Gertrud
Warschauer, December 27, 1952. Einstein Archives 39-517
On Abraham Flexner (1866–1959)
Flexner, the former director of the Institute, is one of
the few enemies I have here. Years ago I conducted
a revolt against him, from which he fl ed.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” January
23, 1954. Flexner was director of the Institute for Advanced
Study when Einstein was hired. He was so protective
and possessive of Einstein that he purposely did not
tell him that President Roosevelt had invited him to the
White House through the offi ces of the Institute. Einstein
eventually got wind of it, apologized to Roosevelt, and received
another invitation, which he accepted.
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 121
On or to Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Why do you emphasize happiness in my case? You,
who have gotten under the skin of so many people
and, indeed, of humanity, have had no occasion to
slip under mine.
To Sigmund Freud, March 22, 1929, in reply to the Viennese
psychoanalyst’s letter on Einstein’s fi ftieth birthday, in
which he congratulated him for being a “happy one.” Einstein
Archives 32-530
I am not prepared to accept all his conclusions, but I
consider his work an immensely valuable contribution
to the science of human behavior. I think he
is even greater as a writer than as a psychologist.
Freud’s brilliant style is unsurpassed by anyone
since Schopenhauer.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 443
*I understand Jung’s vague, imprecise notions, but I
consider them worthless; a lot of talk without any
clear direction. If there has to be a psychiatrist, I
should prefer Freud. I do not believe in him, but I
love very much his concise style and his original, although
rather extravagant, mind.
Diary entry of December 6, 1931. See Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 185. Later, after a period of doubt, he even
 
122 The Quotations
expressed belief in Freud’s ideas, calling it a blessing in a
letter to Freud on April 21, 1936: “It is always a blessing
when a great and beautiful conception is proven to be in
harmony with reality.” See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 220
*You have earned my gratitude and the gratitude of
all men for having devoted all your strength to the
search for truth and for having shown the rarest
courage in professing your convictions all your life.
To Freud, December 3, 1932. Einstein Archives 32-554
The old one . . . had a sharp vision; no illusions
lulled him to sleep except for an often exaggerated
faith in his own ideas.
To A. Bacharach, July 25, 1949. Einstein Archives 57-629
On Galileo Galilei (1564–1642)
*His aim was to substitute for a petrified and barren
system of ideas the unbiased and strenuous quest
for a deeper and more consistent comprehension of
physical and astronomical facts.
From the foreword to Galileo Galilei: Dialogue concerning the
Two Chief World Systems, ca. 1953. See also Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 133. Einstein Archives 1-174
That, alas, is vanity. You find it in so many scientists.
You know, it has always hurt me to think that Galilei
did not acknowledge the work of Kepler.
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 123
From I. Bernard Cohen, “Einstein’s Last Interview,” April
1955, shortly before Einstein’s death. Published in Scientifi c
American 193, no. 1 (July 1955), 69; reprinted in Robinson,
Einstein, 215
The discovery and use of scientific reasoning by
Galileo was one of the most important achievements
in the history of human thought, and marks the real
beginning of physics.
Einstein and Infeld, Evolution of Physics, 7
On Mahatma Gandhi (1869–1948)
I admire Gandhi greatly but I believe there are two
weaknesses in his program. Nonresistance is the
most intelligent way to face difficulty, but it can be
practiced only under ideal conditions. . . . It could
not be carried out against the Nazi Party today.
Then, Gandhi makes a mistake in trying to abolish
the machine from modern civilization. It is here, and
it must be dealt with.
From an interview, Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384,
413, discussing the Indian pacifi st’s goals
A leader of his people, unsupported by any outward
authority: a politician whose success rests not upon
craft or the mastery of technical devices, but simply
on the convincing power of his personality; a victorious
fighter who has always scorned the use of
 
124 The Quotations
force; a man of wisdom and humility, armed with
resolve and inflexible consistency, who has devoted
all his strength to the uplifting of his people and the
betterment of their lot; a man who has confronted
the brutality of Europe with the dignity of the simple
human being, and thus at all times risen superior.
Generations to come, it may well be, will scarce
believe that such a one as this ever in flesh and blood
walked upon this Earth.
Statement on the occasion of Gandhi’s seventy-fi fth birthday,
1939. In Gandhiji, Gandhiji: His Life and Work (Bombay:
Karnatak, 1944), xi. Reprinted in Einstein on Humanism, 94.
Einstein Archives 28-60
I believe that Gandhi’s views were the most enlightened
among all of the political men of our time. We
should strive to do things in his spirit; not to use violence
in fighting for our cause, but by nonparticipation
in what we believe is evil.
From a United Nations Radio interview, June 16, 1950, recorded
in the study of Einstein’s home in Princeton. Reprinted
in the New York Times, June 19, 1950; also quoted in
Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 110
Gandhi, the greatest political genius of our time,
indicated the path to be taken. He gave proof of
what sacrifice man is capable once he has discovered
the right path. His work on behalf of India’s
liberation is living testimony to the fact that man’s
will, sustained by an indomitable conviction, is
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 125
more powerful than material forces that seem
insurmountable.
To the editor of the Japanese magazine Kaizo, September 20,
1952. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 489.
Einstein Archives 60-039
Gandhi’s development resulted from extraordinary
intellectual and moral forces in combination with
political ingenuity and a unique situation. I think
Gandhi would have been Gandhi even without
Thoreau and Tolstoy.
To Walter Harding, a member of the Thoreau Society, August
19, 1953. Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on
Peace, 594. Einstein Archives 32-616
On Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832)
I feel in him a certain condescending attitude toward
the reader, and miss the humility that is comforting,
especially when it comes from great men.
On the German poet. To Leopold Casper, April 9, 1932. Einstein
Archives 49-380
I admire Goethe as a poet without peer, and as one
of the smartest and wisest men of all time. Even his
scholarly ideas deserve to be held in high esteem,
and his faults are those of any great man.
Ibid.
 
126 The Quotations
On Fritz Haber (1868–1934)
*Haber’s picture can be seen everywhere, unfortunately.
It hurts me every time I think about it. I must
reconcile myself to the idea that this man who is
otherwise so outstanding has succumbed to personal
vanity . . . of the most untasteful kind. Such
infl ated vanity is typical of Berliners. What a difference
between them and the French and English!
To Elsa Einstein, December 2, 1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 489.
Haber’s fervent German patriotism, around the time he
converted from Judaism to Christianity, was distasteful to
Einstein. Haber, a chemist who would win the Nobel Prize
for 1918, worked with poison gases to be used in warfare
and personally oversaw the fi rst use of chlorine in trench
warfare in April 1915. His wife, also a chemist, disapproved
and committed suicide three weeks later.
On Lord Richard B. S. Haldane (1856–1928)
*This was the first time I’ve ever heard of such
an important man who speaks at least briefly with
his mother every day. My scientific discourse with
Lord Haldane is for me a source of great excitement,
and knowing him personally is a meaningful
experience.
To Haldane’s mother, Mary, after a trip to Britain, June 15,
1921. Haldane was a prominent British Labour politician,
lawyer, and philosopher. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 149
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 127
On Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976)
Professor Heisenberg was here, a German. He was
an important Nazi (ein grosser Nazi). He is a great
physicist, but not a very pleasant man.
On the Nobel laureate (1932) and creator of quantum mechanics.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,”
October 30, 1954
On Adolf Hitler (1889–1945)
I am very happy here and enjoying the American
summer as well as the news about Hitler’s mad
deed of desperation. He and his henchmen will be
unable to carry on for a long time after he has destroyed
his powerful tool and his halo. Then a general
will take over and the Jews will have some
breathing room.
From an optimistic letter to Rabbi Stephen Wise, July 3,
1934. “Hitler’s mad deed of desperation” was the Night
of Long Knives in late June, during which he arrested top
Stormtrooper (SA) leaders whom he suspected of being
disloyal to him, though there was no such evidence.
The SA leader, Ernst Röhm, was shot and others were
bludgeoned to death. Röhm had been Hitler’s “tool” in
fi ghting Communists in the late 1920s. The general was
probably Kurt von Schleicher, Hitler’s immediate predecessor,
though at this point Einstein probably did not
know that he had been executed as well. Einstein Archives
35-152
 
128 The Quotations
Hitler appeared, a man with limited intellectual
abilities and unfit for any useful work, bursting with
envy and bitterness against all whom circumstance
and nature had favored over him. . . . He picked up
this human flotsam on the streets and in the taverns
and organized them around himself. This is the way
he launched his political career.
From an unpublished manuscript, 1935; published later
in compilations: Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace,
263–264; Dukas and Hoffman, Albert Einstein, the Human
Side, 110; Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 295.
Einstein Archives 28-322
*I haven’t forgotten that the Swiss authorities didn’t
stand by me in any way when Hitler stole all of my
savings, even those designated for my children.
To Heinrich Zangger, September 18, 1938. Einstein Archives
40-116
Yes, my girlfriends and sailboat remained in Berlin.
But Hitler only wanted the latter, which was insulting
to the former.
Recalled by his assistant Ernst Straus, in Seelig, Helle Zeit,
Dunkle Zeit, 68
On Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1853–1926)
A life has ended that will always remain a role model
for future generations. . . . No other person have I
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 129
known for whom duty and joy were one and the
same. This was the reason for his harmonious life.
To the widow of the Dutch physicist and Nobel laureate
(1913), February 25, 1926. Einstein Archives 14-389
On Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)
*Kant’s much-praised view on Time reminds me of
Andersen’s tale of the emperor’s new clothes, only
that instead of the emperor’s new clothes we have
the form of intuition.
To his student Ilse [Rosenthal-]Schneider, September 15,
1919, on the eighteenth-century Prussian philosopher. Einstein
Archives 20-261
*Kant is sort of a highway with lots and lots of milestones.
Then all the little dogs come and each deposits
his contribution at the milestones.
Said to Ilse [Rosenthal-]Schneider, around the same time
as above. See Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientifi c
Truth, 90
What seems to me the most important thing in
Kant’s philosophy is that it speaks of a priori concepts
for the construction of science.
At a discussion in the Société Française de Philosophie,
July 1922. Quoted in Bulletin Société Française de Philosophie
22 (1922), 91; reprinted in Nature 112 (1923), 253
 
130 The Quotations
If Kant had known what is known to us today of the
natural order, I am certain that he would have fundamentally
revised his philosophical conclusions.
Kant built his structure upon the foundations of the
world outlook of Kepler and Newton. Now that the
foundation has been undermined, the structure no
longer stands.
From an interview with Chaim Tchernowitz, The Sentinel,
date unknown
Kant, thoroughly convinced of the indispensability
of certain concepts, took them—just as they are selected—to
be the necessary premises for every kind
of thinking and differentiated them from concepts
of empirical origin.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 13
On George Kennan (1904–2005)
Princeton University Press sent me George Kennan’s
new book [Realities of American Foreign Policy] and I
read it right away. I liked it very much. Kennan has
done his job well.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” August
22, 1954. Kennan, a Princeton resident, was ambassador
to the Soviet Union and developer of the foreign policy
of containment.
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 131
On Johannes Kepler (1571–1630)
[Kepler] belonged to those few who cannot do otherwise
than openly acknowledge their convictions
on every subject. . . . [His] lifework was possible
only when he succeeded in freeing himself to a large
extent from the spiritual tradition in which he was
born. . . . He does not speak about this, but the inner
struggle is refl ected in his letters.
On the Swabian astronomer and mathematician. From Introduction
to Carola Baumgardt, Johannes Kepler: Life and
Letters (New York: Philosophical Library, 1951), 12–13
Neither by poverty, nor by incomprehension of the
contemporaries who ruled over his life and work,
did he allow himself to be crippled or discouraged.
Ibid.
There we meet a finely sensitive person, passionately
dedicated to the search for a deeper insight into the
essence of natural events, who, despite internal and
external difficulties, reached his loftily placed goal.
Ibid., 9
To Lover and Alleged Soviet Spy, Margarita
Konenkova (c. 1900–?)
In 1998, a group of letters, written by Einstein to
a mysterious woman with whom he had had an
 
132 The Quotations
affair before and during World War II while living
in Princeton, was auctioned at Sotheby’s in New
York. The enigmatic woman was Margarita Konenkova.
According to a book published in 1995 by
former Soviet spymaster Pavel Sudoplatov, Konenkova
was a Russian agent whose official mission
was to introduce Einstein to the Soviet vice-consul
in New York and “to influence Oppenheimer and
other prominent American scientists whom she frequently
met in Princeton.” She did succeed in introducing
Einstein to the Soviet vice-consul, Pavel
Mikhailev, and Einstein refers to him in their letters.
But Sudoplatov’s account otherwise becomes
suspect because, among other things, he places
Oppenheimer in Princeton at the time, although
he was actually 2,000 miles away in Los Alamos,
New Mexico, helping to design the bomb; he did
not come to Princeton until 1947, two years after
Mrs. Konenkova had left. Einstein was sixty-six
at the time the letters started in late 1945, and
Mrs. Konenkova, whose husband Sergei created
the bronze bust of Einstein at the Institute for Advanced
Study in 1935, was in her mid-forties
(though the New York Times put her age at 51). She
and Sergei were Russian emigrés who lived in
Greenwich Village from the early 1920s to 1945,
when they were recalled to the Soviet Union. Margarita
was a good friend of Margot Einstein, whose
ex-husband had been an attaché at the Soviet
Embassy in Berlin in the early 1930s. She was
known to have had affairs with other prominent
men, and there is no indication that Einstein was
aware that she might be a spy. See the New York
Times, June 1, 1998, A1, and Sotheby’s Catalog,
June 26, 1998; all the letters below are in Sotheby’s
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 133
Catalog or in the New York Times, slightly differently
translated.
Because of your great love for your homeland, you
would probably have become bitter in time if you
had not taken this step [to return to Russia]. For
unlike me, you have decades of active work and
life ahead of you, whereas for me everything indicates
. . . that my days will have run their course before
too long. I think of you often.
Letter of November 8, 1945
I recently washed my hair by myself, but not with
great success; I am not as careful as you are. But
everything here reminds me of you: . . . the dictionaries,
the wonderful pipe which we thought was
lost, and all the other little things in my hermit’s
cell; and also my lonely nest.
Letter of November 27, 1945. It appears that women liked
to play with Einstein’s famous hair. Another woman friend
in Princeton is known to have cut his hair (obviously not
frequently enough).
People are living now [after the war] just as they
were before . . . and it is clear that they have learned
nothing from the horrors they have had to deal with.
The little intrigues with which they had complicated
their lives before are again taking up most of their
thoughts. What a strange species we are.
Letter of December 30, 1945
 
134 The Quotations
With best wishes and kisses, if this letter reaches you.
And may the devil take anyone who intercepts it.
Letter of February 8, 1946
I can imagine that the May Day ceremonies [in Moscow]
must have been marvelous. But you know
that I watch these exaggerated patriotic exhibitions
with concern. I always try to convince people of
the importance of cosmopolitan, reasonable, and fair
thinking.
Letter of June 1, 1946
On Paul Langevin (1872–1946)
If he loves Mme Curie and she loves him, they do
not have to run off together, because they have
plenty of opportunities to meet in Paris. But I don’t
have the impression that anything special is going
on between the two of them; rather, I found all
three of them bound by a pleasant and innocent
relationship.
To Heinrich Zangger, November 7, 1911, on the married
French physicist’s rumored affair with Marie Curie. The
third person Einstein is referring to was Jean Perrin, another
colleague. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 303
There are so very few in any one generation in whom
clear insight into the nature of things is joined with
an intense feeling for the challenge of true humanity
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 135
and the capacity for militant action. When such a
man departs, he leaves a gap that seems unbearable
to his survivors. . . . His desire to promote a happier
life for all men was perhaps even stronger than his
craving for pure intellectual enlightenment. No one
who appealed to his social conscience ever went
away empty-handed.
From the obituary for Langevin in La Pensée, n.s., no. 12
(May–June 1947), 13–14. Einstein Archives 5-150
I had already heard of Langevin’s death. He was
one of my dearest acquaintances, a true saint, and
talented besides. It is true that the politicians exploited
his goodness, for he was unable to see
through the base motives that were so foreign to his
nature.
To Maurice Solovine, April 9, 1947. Published in Letters to
Solovine, 99. Einstein Archives 21-250
On Max von Laue (1879–1960)
*It was interesting to see the way in which [von
Laue] cut himself off, step by step, from the traditions
of the herd, under the influence of a strong
sense of justice.
On his friend and German Nobel laureate in physics.
Written to Max Born, September 7, 1944, in Born-Einstein
Letters, 145. Einstein Archives 8-207
 
136 The Quotations
On Philipp Lenard (1862–1947)
I admire Lenard as a master of experimental physics;
however, he has yet to accomplish anything of
importance in theoretical physics, and his objections
to the general theory of relativity are so superfi cial
that I had not deemed it necessary until now to reply
to them in detail.
On the staunch Nazi, anti-Semite, and Nobel laureate in
physics (1905). Berliner Tageblatt, August 27, 1920, 1–2.
CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 45
On Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870–1924) and
Friedrich Engels (1820–1895)
I respect Lenin as a man who gave all his energy, at
a total sacrifice of his personal life, to dedicating
himself to the realization of socialist justice. I don’t
consider his methods appropriate. But one thing is
certain: men such as he are the guardians and renewers
of mankind’s conscience.
Statement for the League of Human Rights on Lenin’s
death, January 6, 1929. Einstein Archives 34-439
Outside Russia, Lenin and Engels are of course not
valued as scientific thinkers and no one would be
interested in refuting them as such. The same might
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 137
also be the case in Russia, except there one doesn’t
dare say so.
To K. R. Leistner, September 8, 1932. Einstein Archives
50-877
On Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1853–1928)
Lorentz is a marvel of intelligence and exquisite tact.
A living work of art! In my opinion he was the most
intelligent of the theorists present [at the Solvay
Congress in Brussels].
To Heinrich Zangger, November 1911, on the Dutch physicist
and Nobel laureate (1902). CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 305
My feeling of intellectual inferiority with regard to
you cannot spoil the great delight of [our] conversation,
especially because the fatherly kindness you
show to all people does not allow any feeling of despondency
to arise.
To Lorentz, February 18, 1912. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 360
*How often when the human affairs surrounding
me seemed hopelessly sad, have I found deep consolation
in your noble and outstanding personality.
A man like you gives consolation and exaltation by
his mere existence and example.
To Lorentz, July 15, 1923. Einstein Archives 16-552
 
138 The Quotations
He shaped his life like a precious work of art down
to the smallest detail. His never-failing kindness
and generosity and his sense of justice, coupled with
a sure and intuitive understanding of people and
human affairs, made him a leader in any sphere he
entered.
From the eulogy at the grave of Lorentz, 1928. Published in
Ideas and Opinions, 73. Einstein Archives 16-126
To me personally, he meant more than all the others
encountered in my lifetime.
From a message for commemoration in Leyden, February
27, 1953. In the enlarged edition of Mein Weltbild, 31. Einstein
Archives 16-631
On Ernst Mach (1838–1916)
In him, the immediate pleasure gained in seeing and
comprehending—Spinoza’s amor dei intellectualis—
was so strong that he looked at the world with the
curious eyes of a child until well into old age, so that
he could find joy and contentment in understanding
how everything is connected.
From the eulogy for the philosopher whose critique of
Newton played a role in Einstein’s development of relativity
theory, even though Mach himself was critical of the
theory. In Physikalische Zeitschrift, April 1, 1916; CPAE,
Vol. 6, Doc. 29
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 139
Mach was as good a scholar of mechanics as he was
a deplorable philosopher.
Quoted in Bulletin Société Française de Philosophie 22 (1922),
91; reprinted in Nature 112 (1923), 253; see also CPAE, Vol. 6,
Doc. 29, n. 6, and Vol. 13, “Discussion Remarks”
On Lise Meitner (1878–1968)
*She knows her way around the family of radioactive
substances better than I know the way around
my own family.
Quoted in Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientifi c
Truth, 113
On Albert Michelson (1852–1931)
I always think of Michelson as the artist in science.
His greatest joy seemed to come from the beauty of
the experiment itself, and the elegance of the method
employed.
From “In Memory of Albert A. Michelson on His 100th
Birthday,” December 19, 1952, on the physicist and Nobel
laureate (1907) who, with Edward Morley in 1881, had already
experimentally validated Einstein’s postulation that
the speed of light is independent of the frame of reference
in which it is measured. Einstein Archives 1-168. Einstein
said that he was unaware of the experiment when he wrote
his 1905 paper on the special theory of relativity; see discussion
in Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 217–219.
 
140 The Quotations
*My admiration for Michelson’s experiment is for
the ingenious method to compare the location of the
interference pattern with the location of the image
of the light source. In this way he overcame the dif-
fi culty that we are not able to change the direction of
the earth’s rotation.
To Robert Shankland, September 17, 1953. Einstein Archives
17-203
On Jawaharlal Nehru (1889–1964)
May I tell you of the deep emotion with which I read
recently that the Indian Constituent Assembly has
abolished untouchability? I know how large a part
you have played in the various phases of India’s
struggle for emancipation, and how grateful lovers
of freedom must be to you, as well as to your great
teacher Mahatma Gandhi.
To the Indian prime minister (1947–1964). Letter of June 13,
1947. Einstein Archives 32-725
On Isaac Newton (1643–1727)
His clear and wide-ranging ideas will retain their
unique significance for all time as the foundation
of our whole modern conceptual structure in the
sphere of natural philosophy.
From “What Is the Theory of Relativity?” The Times (London),
November 28, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 25
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 141
It was highly honorable of his logical conscience
that Newton decided to create absolute space. . . .
He could just as well have called the absolute space
the “rigid ether.” He needed such a reality in order
to give objective meaning to acceleration. Later attempts
to do without this absolute space in mechanics
were (with the exception of Mach’s) only a game
of hide-and-seek.
To Moritz Schlick, June 30, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 67
In my opinion, the greatest creative geniuses are
Galileo and Newton, whom I regard in a certain
sense as forming a unity. And in this unity Newton
is [the one] who has achieved the most imposing
feat in the realm of science.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with
Einstein, 40
*He is a yet more significant figure than his own
mastery makes him, since he was placed by fate at a
turning point in the world’s intellectual development.
This is brought home vividly to us when we
recall that before Newton there was no comprehensive
system of physical causality which could in any
way render the deeper characters of the world of
concrete experience.
From “Isaac Newton,” in Manchester Guardian Weekly,
March 19, 1927, celebrating the second centenary of Newton’s
death. Reprinted in Smithsonian Annual Report for 1927
 
142 The Quotations
In one person he combined the experimenter, the
theorist, the mechanic, and, not the least, the artist
of exposition.
From the Foreword to Newton, Opticks (New York:
 McGraw-Hill, 1931). Einstein Archives 4-046
Newton was the first to succeed in finding a clearly
formulated basis from which he could deduce a
wide field of phenomena by means of mathematical
thinking—logically, quantitatively, and in harmony
with experience.
On Newton’s upcoming 300th birthday, in Manchester
Guardian, Christmas 1942. See also Out of My Later
Years, 201
*To think of him is to think of his work. For such a
man can be understood only by thinking of him as a
scene on which the struggle for eternal truth took
place.
Ibid.
Newton . . . you found the only way which, in your
age, was just about possible for a man of highest
thought and creative power. The concepts, which
you created, are even today still guiding our thinking
in physics, although we now know that they
will have to be replaced . . . if we aim at a profounder
understanding of relationships.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 31–33
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 143
On Alfred Nobel (1833–1896)
Alfred Nobel invented the most powerful explosive
ever known up to his time, a means of destruction
par excellence. In order to atone for this, in order to
relieve his conscience, he instituted his awards for
the promotion of peace and for the achievement of
peace.
From “The War Is Won but the Peace Is Not,” speech at the
fi fth Nobel anniversary dinner in New York, December 10,
1945. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
381–382
On Emmy Noether (1882–1935)
On receiving the new work from Fräulein Noether,
I again find it a great injustice that she cannot lecture
officially. I would be very much in favor of taking
energetic steps in the process [to overturn this
rule].
To Felix Klein, December 27, 1918, on the brilliant German
mathematician, Emmy Noether, who was not allowed to be
on the faculty of the University of Göttingen because of her
gender. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 677
It would not have done the Old Guard at Göttingen
any harm, had they learned a thing or two from her.
She certainly knows what she is doing.
To David Hilbert, May 24, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 548
 
144 The Quotations
In the judgment of the most competent living mathematicians,
Fräulein Noether was the most signifi -
cant creative mathematical genius thus far produced
since the higher education of women began.
From the obituary for Emmy Noether, New York Times,
May 4, 1935. Einstein Archives 5-138
On J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904–1967)
I have to say that Oppenheimer is an exceptional
person. Seldom has someone been so talented and
upstanding. He may not have contributed anything
extraordinary to science, that is, he didn’t move
science forward, but he is technically very gifted.
In all my dealings with him, he has acted with
decorum.
On the American physicist, director of the Manhattan Project’s
Los Alamos Laboratory (1942–1945), and director of
the Institute for Advanced Study (1947–1966). Quoted by
Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” April 24, 1954
On Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958)
This Pauli is a well-oiled head.
On the Austrian physicist and Nobel laureate (1945). To his
sister, Maja, August 1933. Einstein Archives 29-416. In a letter
to Max and Hedi Born of December 30, 1921, he calls
Pauli a “splendid fellow for his 21 years” after Pauli wrote
a well-received encyclopedia article summarizing relativity
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 145
theory. See Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 62. CPAE, Vol. 12,
Doc. 345
On Max Planck (1858–1947)
It was largely because of the decisive and cordial
manner in which he supported this theory that it attracted
notice so quickly among my colleagues in
the fi eld.
On the German physicist and Nobel laureate (1918) whom
Einstein admired, speaking about the special theory of relativity,
in “Max Planck as Scientist” (1913). Planck was more
responsible than anyone else for fi rmly establishing relativity
theory after 1905. CPAE, Vol. 4, Doc. 23
Luring Planck away from here is totally inconceivable.
He is rooted to his native land with every fi ber
of his body, like no other.
To Heinrich Zangger, June 1, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 52
Planck’s misfortune stirs my heart deeply. I could
not hold back my tears when I visited him after my
return from Rostock. He is wonderfully brave and
staid, but his gnawing pain shows through.
To Max Born, December 8, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 198.
Planck’s wife had died at age forty-eight in 1909, and his
twin daughters died in 1917 and 1919 (both in childbirth).
One of his sons, Erwin, had been taken prisoner of war in
1914 by the French and was later released, and the other
died in action in 1917. Erwin was hanged by the Nazis in
 
146 The Quotations
1945 after his participation in a failed attempt to assassinate
Hitler.
How different, and how much better, it would be for
mankind if there were more like him among us. But
it seems not possible. Honorable persons in every
age and everywhere have remained isolated, unable
to infl uence external events.
To the second Frau Planck, November 10, 1947, about her
husband. Einstein Archives 19-406
He was one of the finest people I have ever
known . . . but he really did not understand physics,
[because] during the eclipse of 1919 he stayed up all
night to see if it would confirm the bending of light
by the gravitational field. If he had really understood
the general theory of relativity, he would have
gone to bed the way I did.
Quoted by Ernst Straus in French, Einstein: A Centenary
Volume, 31
On Walther Rathenau (1867–1922)
It is easy to be an idealist when one lives in the
clouds. But he was an idealist who lived down on
Earth and knew its scents like few others.
On the German foreign minister who was assassinated in
July 1922 by members of a secret fascist terrorist organization
called “Organisation Consul.” From obituary for
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 147
Rathenau in Neue Rundschau 33, no. 8 (1922), 815–816. Einstein
Archives 32-819
On several occasions I spent hours in Rathenau’s
company discussing diverse subjects. These talks
tended to be rather one-sided: on the whole, he
spoke and I listened. For one thing, it was not so
easy to get the floor; for another, it was so pleasant
to listen to him that one did not try very hard.
To Johanon Twersky, February 2, 1943. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 52. Einstein Archives 32-836
On Romain Rolland (1866–1944)
He is right in attacking individual greed and the national
scramble for wealth that make war inevitable.
He may not be far wrong in turning to social revolution
as the only means of breaking the war system.
From an interview, Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384,
413, on the most prominent pacifi st of the time and Nobel
laureate in literature (1915)
On Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882–1945)
*The burden he carried was heavy, but his sense of
humor gave him an inner freedom seldom found
among those who are constantly faced with the most
critical decisions. He was unbelievably bound and
determined to attain his final goals, yet amazingly
 
148 The Quotations
fl exible in overcoming the strong resistance any farsighted
statesman faces in a democratic country.
Commemorative words for FDR, Aufbau 11, no. 17 (April 27,
1945), 7
No matter when this man might have been taken
from us, we would have felt we had suffered an irreplaceable
loss. . . . May he have a lasting infl uence
on our thoughts and convictions.
Ibid. According to the New York Times, August 19, 1946,
Einstein was sure that FDR would have forbidden the
bombing of Hiroshima had he been alive. Einstein had
written a letter to FDR in March 1945 warning him of the
bomb’s devastating effects; the president died before he
had a chance to read it.
I’m so sorry that Roosevelt is president—otherwise
I would visit him more often.
To friend Frieda Bucky. Quoted in The Jewish Quarterly 15,
no. 4 (Winter 1967–68), 34
On Ilse Rosenthal-Schneider (1891–1990)
*She has a well-founded knowledge in these matters
and is quite independent and original in her
views and opinions. I am convinced she is able to
present philosophy and history of science in an attractive
and stimulating manner.
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 149
On writing a letter of recommendation for his former Berlin
student to fi ll a permanent lectureship in philosophy of
science at the University of Sydney, 1944. See RosenthalSchneider,
Reality and Scientifi c Truth, 22
On Bertrand Russell (1872–1970)
The clarity, certainty, and impartiality you apply to
the logical, philosophical, and human issues in your
books are unparalleled in our generation.
To Bertrand Russell, October 14, 1931. See Grüning, Ein
Haus für Albert Einstein, 369. Einstein Archives 33-155
Great spirits have always encountered opposition
from mediocre minds. The mediocre mind is incapable
of understanding the man who refuses to
bow blindly to conventional prejudices and chooses
instead to express his opinions courageously and
honestly.
On the controversy surrounding Russell’s appointment to
the faculty of the City University of New York. Some conservative
religious and so-called patriotic New Yorkers regarded
Russell as a propagandist against religion and morality
and brought legal suit against his appointment. His
teaching contract was rescinded. Quoted in the New York
Times, March 19, 1940. Einstein Archives 33-168
I read [to some visitors] Bertrand Russell’s article on
religion. I consider him the best of the living writers.
 
150 The Quotations
The article is masterfully crafted—everything makes
sense.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” December
31, 1953. The article was “What Is an Agnostic,” in
Leo Rosten’s Religions in America (1952)
On Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965)
He is a great figure who bids for the moral leadership
of the world.
From an interview, about the Alsatian-born doctor, missionary,
humanitarian, and winner of the Nobel Peace
Prize (1952). Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384, 413
He is the only Westerner who has had a moral effect
on this generation comparable to Gandhi’s. As in
the case of Gandhi, the extent of this effect is overwhelmingly
due to the example he gave by his own
life’s work.
From a statement originally intended for a new edition
of Mein Weltbild in 1953 but not published there. Quoted
in Sayen, Einstein in America, 296. Einstein Archives
33-223
On George Bernard Shaw (1856–1950)
He is a magnificent fellow, with deep insight into
the human condition.
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 151
On the British writer and winner of the Nobel Prize in
lit erature (1925). To Michele Besso, January 5, 1929, in a
discussion of Shaw’s book on socialism. See Einstein, Correspondance
avec Michèle Besso 1903–1955 (Paris: Hermann,
1979), 240
Shaw is undoubtedly one of the world’s greatest fi gures.
I once said of him that his plays remind me of
Mozart. There is not one superfluous word in Shaw’s
prose, just as there is not one superfluous note in
Mozart’s music.
In Cosmic Religion (1931), 109. Original source unknown.
Thus speaks the Voltaire of our day.
Recalled by Hedwig Fischer, 1928, in P. de Mendelsohn’s
The S. Fischer Verlag (1970), 1164
On Bishop Fulton J. Sheen (1895–1979)
Bishop Sheen is one of the most intelligent [gescheitesten]
people in today’s world. He wrote a book in
which he defends religion against science.
On the American Catholic bishop. Quoted by Fantova,
“Conversations with Einstein,” December 13, 1953. The
book Einstein refers to is Religion without God (1928). Sheen,
on the other hand, disparaged Einstein’s “cosmic religion.”
See “Others on Einstein.”
 
152 The Quotations
On Upton Sinclair (1878–1968)
He is in the doghouse here because he relentlessly
sheds light on the hurly-burly dark side of American
life.
On the American writer and Pulitzer Prize winner (1942).
To the Lebach family, January 16, 1931. Einstein Archives
47-373
On Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677)
I am fascinated by Spinoza’s pantheism. I admire
even more his contribution to modern thought . . .
because he is the first philosopher who deals with
the soul and the body as one, not as two separate
things.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929, on the
seventeenth-century Jewish philosopher, whose thought
greatly infl uenced Einstein; reprinted in Viereck, Glimpses
of the Great, 448. The German Romantic poet Novalis called
Spinoza a “God-intoxicated man.”
In my opinion, his opinions have not gained general
acceptance by all those striving for clarity and logical
rigor only because they require not only consistency
of thought but also unusual integrity, magnanimity—and
modesty.
To D. Runes, September 8, 1932. Einstein Archives 33-286
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 153
*I have been reading Spinoza’s letters. He well understood
the liberation one gains through pastoral
seclusion.
To Leo Szilard, September 15, 1928. Einstein Archives
33-271
Spinoza is one of the deepest and purest souls our
Jewish people has produced.
In a letter of 1946. As quoted in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein:
Creator and Rebel, 95, though a search of the archives has
found no original source.
*I am very glad to hear that you are so profoundly
interested in Spinoza’s work. I too have a great admiration
for the man but my knowledge of his works
is not very profound.
Letter of November 23, 1951, offered on eBay October 16,
2008. Addressee is not yet identifi ed.
On Adlai Stevenson (1900–1965)
Stevenson is very talented, but he doesn’t make
good use of it.
On the former Democratic Illinois governor who unsuccessfully
ran for president against Eisenhower in 1952 and
1956. Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,”
December 12, 1953
 
154 The Quotations
On Rabindranath Tagore (1861–1941)
The verbal dialogue with Tagore was a complete disaster
because of difficulties in communication, and
should never have been published.
To Romain Rolland, October 10, 1930, on the conversation
with Indian mystic, poet, musician, and Nobel laureate in
literature (1913) that took place in summer 1930, published in
the New York Times Magazine on August 10, 1930. (A second
discussion took place August 19.) Though journalist Dmitri
Marianoff claimed Einstein personally vetted the article before
publication, Einstein now appears to have changed his
mind on its accuracy or in fact did not have a chance to see
it first. Einstein shortened Tagore’s first name and nicknamed
him “Rabbi Tagore.” Einstein Archives 33-029
On Nikola Tesla (1856–1943)
*I am happy that, as you celebrate your 75th birthday,
you, as an eminent pioneer in the realm of highfrequency
currents, have been able to witness the
wonderful technical developments enabled by this
fi eld. I congratulate you on the great success of your
life’s work.
To Tesla, June 1931. Einstein Archives 48-566
On Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910)
I doubt if there has been a true moral leader of
worldwide infl uence since Tolstoy. . . . He remains
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 155
in many ways the foremost prophet of our time. . . .
There is no one today with Tolstoy’s deep insight
and moral force.
On the great Russian novelist. From an interview, Survey
Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384, 413
On Arturo Toscanini (1867–1957)
You are not only the unrivaled interpreter of world
musical literature, whose construction deserves the
highest admiration, [but] in your fight against the
fascist miscreants you have also shown yourself to
be a highly conscientious man.
To the Italian conductor, composer, and pianist, March 1,
1936. Einstein Archives 34-386
Only one who devotes himself to a cause with his
whole strength and soul can be a true master. For
this reason, mastery demands the whole person. Toscanini
demonstrates this in every manifestation of
his life.
From a statement about Arturo Toscanini on the presentation
of the American Hebrew Medal to him in 1938. The
musician was strongly opposed to German and Italian fascism
and left Europe for the United States in the mid-1930s.
Einstein Archives 34-390
 
156 The Quotations
On Raoul Wallenberg (1912–?)
As an old Jew, I appeal to you to do everything
possible to find and send back to his country Raoul
Wallenberg, who was one of the very few who, during
the bad years of the Nazi persecution, on his
own accord and risking his own life, worked to rescue
thousands of my unhappy Jewish people.
To Joseph Stalin, November 17, 1947. An underling replied
that a search proved unsuccessful. Wallenberg, a Swede, is
credited with saving the lives of tens of thousands of Hungarian
Jews during World War II. He was eventually captured,
not by the Nazis but by the Soviet Army when it entered
Budapest in 1945, and was never seen again. His fate
is unknown. See Roboz Einstein, Hans Albert Einstein, 14.
Einstein Archives 34-750
On Chaim Weizmann (1874–1952)
The chosen one of the chosen people.
To Chaim Weizmann, October 27, 1923. In 1949, he became
the fi rst president of Israel. Einstein Archives 33-366
My feelings toward Weizmann are ambivalent, as
Freud would say.
Said to Abraham Pais, 1947. See Pais, A Tale of Two Continents,
228
 
On Friends, Scientists, and Others 157
On Hermann Weyl (1885–1955)
He is a very remarkable mind but a little removed
from reality. In the new edition of his book, he made
a complete mess of relativity, I think—God forgive
him. Perhaps he will eventually realize that, for all
his keen perceptions, he has shot wide off the mark.
To Heinrich Zangger, February 27, 1920, on the GermanSwiss-American
physicist who later joined the Institute for
Advanced Study faculty the same year as Einstein. CPAE,
Vol. 9, Doc. 332
On John Wheeler (1911–2008)
What Wheeler told me left a big impression on me,
but I don’t think I’ll live to find out who is correct.
. . . It was the first time I heard something sensible.
. . . A possibility would be a combination of
his ideas and mine.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,”
November 11, 1953, about the Princeton University
theoretical physicist who in 1967 would coin the term
“black hole”
On Woodrow Wilson (1856–1924)
*At first glance, his greatest contribution, the League
of Nations, appears to have failed. Still, despite the
 
158 The Quotations
fact that the League was crippled by his contemporaries
and rejected by his own country, I have no
doubt that Wilson’s work will one day emerge in
more effective form.
On the twenty-eighth U.S. president (served 1913–1921)
and former president of Princeton University (1902–1910),
after which he became governor of New Jersey. From
“I Am an American,” June 22, 1940. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 471. Einstein Archives 29-092
Among the most important American statesmen it
is probably Wilson who most represents the intellectual
type. He, too, seemed not to have been very
talented when it came to people skills.
Ibid.
 
On Germans and Germany
 
 
*What you have said about German professors is
not at all exaggerated. . . . Blind obedience to authority
is the greatest enemy of the truth.
To Swiss teacher Jost Winteler, with whom he boarded
while attending school in Aarau, complaining about a professor
who would accept no criticism, July 8, 1901. CPAE,
Vol. 1, Doc. 115
These are not really people with natural sentiments;
they are cold and of an odd mixture of class-based
condescension and servility, without showing goodwill
toward their fellow men. Ostentatious luxury
alongside creeping misery in the streets.
To Michele Besso, May 13, 1911, commenting on the Germans
of Prague. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 267
Now I understand the complacency of the citizens
of Berlin. One gets so much outside stimulation here
that one doesn’t feel one’s own emptiness as profoundly
as one would in a more tranquil little spot.
To the Hurwitz family, May 4, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 6
It is extraordinarily inspiring here in Berlin.
To Wilhelm Wien, June 15, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 14
The people are like anywhere else, but you can
make a better selection because there are so many of
them.
 
162 The Quotations
To Robert Heller, July 20, 1914, on Berlin. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 25
*I know people in Germany whose private lives are
guided by virtually unbounded altruism, but who
were awaiting the declaration of unlimited submarine
warfare with the greatest impatience. . . . These
people must be shown that it is necessary to have
consideration for non-Germans as worthy equals,
that it is essential to earn the trust of foreign countries,
in order to be able to exist, that the goals that
one sets for oneself cannot be achieved through
force and treachery.
To Romain Rolland, August 22, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 374
*Germans who love culture will soon again be able
to be as proud of their fatherland as ever—and with
more justifi cation than before 1914.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, December 6, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 665
The country is like a man with a badly upset stomach
who has not yet vomited enough.
To Aurel Stodola, March 31, 1919, on the right-wing putsch
in Berlin two weeks earlier. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 16
People here appeal to me better in misfortune than
in fortune and plenty.
To Heinrich Zangger, June 1, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 52
 
On Germans and Germany 163
*These people have no clear notion that they have
become the blind instruments of an arrogant and
unscrupulous minority, which is why their professed
indignation about a “dictated peace” is not a hollow
phrase or sham, but reflects their actual experience.
To Adriaan Fokker, July 30, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 78
Ever since things have been going badly for the people
here, they appeal to me incomparably better.
Misfortune suits mankind immeasurably better than
success.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 24, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 233
Berlin is the place to which I am most closely bound
by human and scientifi c ties.
To K. Haenisch, Prussian Minister of Education, September
8, 1920. Einstein Archives 36-022
*There is here in Germany an undeniable irritability
toward me because of my pacifist and other political
attitudes, which is amplified by the country’s diffi -
cult political situation.
To Evelyn Wagner, January 31, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 38
Germany had the misfortune of becoming poisoned,
fi rst because of plenty, and then because of want.
Aphorism, 1923. Einstein Archives 36-591
 
164 The Quotations
Funny people, these Germans. To them I am a stinking
flower, yet they make me into a boutonniere
time and time again.
From his Travel Diary, April 17, 1925
Hitler is living—or shall I say sitting—on the empty
stomach of Germany. As soon as economic conditions
improve, Hitler will sink into oblivion.
In Cosmic Religion (1931), 106–107. Perhaps a paraphrase.
Original source unknown.
As long as I have any choice, I will only stay in a
country where political liberty, tolerance, and equality
of all citizens before the law prevail. . . . These
conditions do not obtain in Germany at the present
time.
From “Political Manifesto,” a statement to the American
press before returning to Europe regarding the Hitler
regime, March 11, 1933. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 269–270. Einstein Archives
28-235
The overemphasized military mentality in the German
state was alien to me even as a boy. When my
father moved to Italy, he took steps, at my request,
to have me released from German citizenship because
I wanted to become a Swiss citizen.
To Julius Marx, April 3, 1933. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 26. Einstein Archives
51-070
 
On Germans and Germany 165
The statements I have issued to the press concerned
my intention to resign my position in the Academy
and renounce my Prussian citizenship. I gave as my
reason for these steps that I did not wish to live in a
country where the individual does not enjoy equality
before the law and freedom to say and teach
what he likes.
To the Prussian Academy of Sciences, April 5, 1933. Einstein
Archives 29-295
*I cannot help but remind you that, in all these years,
I have only enhanced Germany’s prestige and never
allowed myself to be alienated by the systematic attacks
on me in the rightist press, especially those of
recent years in which no one took the trouble to
stand up for me. . . . Is not the destruction of German
Jews by starvation the official program of the
present German government?
To Max Planck, April 6, 1933, after resigning from the Prussian
Academy of Sciences. Einstein Archives 19-391
You have also remarked that a “good word” on my
part for “the German people” would have produced
a great effect abroad. To this I must reply that such
testimony as you suggest would have been equivalent
to a repudiation of all the notions of justice and
liberty for which I have stood all of my life. Such
testimony would not be, as you put it, a good word
for the German nation.
 
166 The Quotations
From a reply to the Prussian Academy of Sciences, April 12,
1933, after it accepted Einstein’s resignation. Einstein Archives
29-297
I have now been promoted to an “evil monster” in
Germany, and all my money has been taken away
from me. But I console myself with the thought that
the latter would soon be gone, anyway.
To Max Born, May 30, 1933, after Einstein’s German bank
account had been confi scated. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
112. Einstein Archives 8-192
I cannot understand the passive response of the
whole civilized world to this modern barbarism.
Doesn’t the world see that Hitler is aiming for war?
Quoted by a reporter for Bunte Woche (Vienna), October 1,
1933; also quoted in Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 194
Germany the way it used to be was [a cultural] oasis
in the desert.
To Alfred Kerr, July 1934. Einstein Archives 50-687
Germany is still war-minded and conflict is inevitable.
The nation has been on the decline mentally and
morally since 1870. Many of the men I associated
with in the Prussian Academy have not been of the
highest caliber in the nationalistic years since the
world war.
From an interview, Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935), 384,
413
 
On Germans and Germany 167
You have found the right words for the great problems
of our time, and they do not remain without
effect. I only wish you would not have used the
word “Aryans” as if it were a rational notion.
To Rabbi Stephen Wise, September 11, 1935, commenting
on a speech Wise gave in Lucerne. Einstein Archives
35-172
*It is well known that German Fascism has been
particularly violent in its attack upon my Jewish
brothers. . . . The alleged reason for this persecution
is the desire to purify the “Aryan” race in Germany.
As a matter of fact, no such “Aryan” race exists; this
fi ction has been invented solely to justify the persecution
and expropriation of the Jews.
From a CBS radio broadcast sponsored by the American
Christian Committee for German Refugees and the Emergency
Committee in Aid of Polish Refugees from Nazism,
October 22, 1935. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 293. Einstein Archives 28-317
*For centuries the German people have been subject
to indoctrination by an unending succession of
schoolmasters and drill sergeants. The Germans
have been trained in hard work and were made to
learn many things, but they have also been drilled
in slavish submission, military routine and brutality.
The postwar democratic Constitution of the Weimar
Republic fitted the German people about as
well as the giant’s clothes fi tted Tom Thumb.
 
168 The Quotations
From an unpublished manuscript, 1935; published later
in compilations: Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace,
263–264; Dukas and Hoffman, Albert Einstein, the Human
Side, 110; Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 295.
Einstein Archives 28-322
The only good thing I can see in this is that Hitler,
obsessed with his power, will engage in enough stupidities
to unite the world against Germany—an
ever more grotesque version of Kaiser Wilhelm.
To Otto Nathan, September 15, 1936. Bergreen Albert Einstein
Collection, Vassar College, Box M2003-009, Folder 1.15.
Einstein Archives 38-507
*In 1919 the Academy urged me to accept German
citizenship in addition to my Swiss one. I was stupid
enough to give in.
To Mileva Einstein-Mari´c, July 20, 1938. Translated in
Neffe, Einstein, 276. Einstein Archives 75-949
They have always had the tendency to serve psychopaths
slavishly. But they have never been able to
accomplish it so successfully as at the present time.
Written in August as a scribble on the reverse of a letter
dated July 28, 1939, alluding to Hitler. Einstein Archives
28-500.1
Because of their wretched traditions, the Germans
are so evil that it will be very difficult to remedy the
situation by sensible, not to say humane, means.
 
On Germans and Germany 169
I hope that by the end of the war they will largely
kill themselves off with the kindly help of God.
To Otto Juliusburger, Summer 1942. Quoted in Sayen, Einstein
in America, 146. Einstein Archives 38-199
The Germans as an entire people are responsible for
these mass murders and must be punished as a people.
. . . Behind the Nazi Party stand the German
people, who elected Hitler after he had in his book
and in his speeches made his shameful intentions
clear beyond the possibility of misunderstanding.
On the heroes of the Warsaw Ghetto, in Bulletin of the Society
of Polish Jews (New York), 1944. Einstein Archives 29-099
Since the Germans massacred my Jewish brethren in
Europe, I will have nothing further to do with Germans,
including a relatively harmless academy. This
does not include those few who remained levelheaded
within the range of possibility.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, December 14, 1946. Einstein included
Otto Hahn, Max von Laue, Max Planck, and Arnold
Sommerfeld among the few. Einstein Archives 21-368
The crime of the Germans is truly the most abominable
ever to be recorded in the history of the socalled
civilized nations. The conduct of the German
intellectuals—seen as a group—was no better than
that of the mob.
To Otto Hahn, January 26, 1949. Einstein Archives 12-072
 
170 The Quotations
The attitude of the overwhelming majority of the
Germans toward our people was such that we cannot
help consider them anything but a danger. I
judge the relations of the Germans to other nations
to be equally dangerous.
From an interview with Alfred Werner, Liberal Judaism 16
(April–May 1949), 4–12
After the mass murders that the Germans committed
against the Jewish people it should be evident
that a self-respecting Jew does not want to be associated
with any official German event. My membership
renewal in the Orden pour le mérite is therefore
out of the question.
To German president Theodor Heuss, January 16, 1951.
Einstein was given this prestigious medal in 1923, but was
forced by the Nazis to return it in 1933. He was invited by
the German government to rejoin the order in 1950, and as
the above letter shows, he declined. Charles Darwin, Michael
Faraday, Max Planck, Walther Nernst, David Hilbert,
the Grimm Brothers, and Richard Strauss were among the
hundreds of artists and scientists who had received the
medal since 1842. Einstein Archives 34-427
If I were wrong, then one [author] would have been
enough!
Einstein’s retort with regard to his theory when he heard
that a book titled 100 Authors against Einstein was published
in Germany. Quoted in Stephen Hawking, A Brief
History of Time (London: Bantam, 1988), 178
 
On Humankind
 
 
At times such as this, one realizes what a sorry species
one belongs to. I am moving along quietly with
my contemplations while experiencing a mixture of
pity and revulsion.
To Paul Ehrenfest, August 19, 1914, at the onset of World
War I. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 34
I see that often the most power-hungry and politically
extreme people could not as much as kill a fl y
in their personal lives.
To Paul Ehrenfest, June 3, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 350
How is it possible that this culture-loving era could
be so monstrously amoral? More and more I come
to value charity and love of one’s fellow being above
everything else.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 6, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 403
Man tries to fashion for himself a simplified and intelligible
picture of the world; he then tries to substitute
this cosmos for his own world of experience. . . .
Each makes this cosmos and its construction the
pivot of his emotional life in order to find the peace
and security he can’t find in the narrow whirlpool of
personal experience.
From “Motives for Research,” a lecture delivered at Max
Planck’s sixtieth birthday, April 1918. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 7
 
174 The Quotations
*I am convinced that the effort of striving for an improved
existence as a wage earner combined with
the disdain people have toward those who are not
gainfully employed are sufficiently strong psychological
forces to ensure the healthy development of
economic life.
To the society “A Guaranteed Subsistence for All,” December
12, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 16
*God knows, I prefer people with anxieties, whose
tomorrow is threatened by uncertainty.
To Max Born, January 19, 1919, on a postcard from Switzerland.
CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 3
Failure and deprivation are the best educators and
purifi ers.
To Auguste Hochberger, July 30, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 79
One should keep in mind that on average the moral
qualities of people do not differ much from country
to country.
To H. A. Lorentz, August 1, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 80
*Misfortune suits mankind immeasurably better
than success.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 24, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 233
 
On Humankind 175
*It is not enough for us to play a part as individuals
in the cultural development of the human race; we
must also attempt tasks which only nations as a
whole can perform.
From an address delivered June 27, 1921, to a Zionist meeting
in Berlin, published in Mein Weltbild (1934). See Ideas
and Opinions, 182. Einstein Archives 28-010
Children don’t heed the life experiences of their parents,
and nations ignore history. Bad lessons always
have to be learned anew.
Aphorism, October 12, 1923. Einstein Archives 36-589
Why do people speak of great men in terms of nationality?
Great Germans, great Englishmen? Goethe
always protested against being called a German
poet. Great men are simply men and are not to be
considered from the point of view of nationality, nor
should the environment in which they were brought
up be taken into account.
Quoted in the New York Times, April 18, 1926, 12:4
*Reading, after a certain age, diverts the mind too
much from its creative pursuits. Any man who reads
too much and uses his own brain too little falls into
lazy habits of thinking, just as the man who spends
too much time in the theater is tempted to be content
with living vicariously instead of living his
own life.
 
176 The Quotations
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 437
I look upon mankind as a tree with many sprouts. It
does not seem to me that every sprout and every
branch possesses an individual soul.
Ibid., 444
*People are like bicycles. They can keep their balance
only as long as they keep moving.
To son Eduard, February 5, 1930. Translated in Neffe, Einstein,
369. Einstein Archives 75-590
It is people who make me seasick—not the sea. But
I am afraid that science has yet to find a solution for
this ailment.
To the Schering-Kahlbaum company in Berlin, after it sent
him some anti-seasickness samples. November 28, 1930.
Einstein Archives 48-663
Enjoying the joys of others and suffering with
them—these are the best guides for men.
To Valentine Bulgakov, November 4, 1931. Einstein Archives
45-702
*Doing “good” (in an ethical sense) is in reality dif-
fi cult to achieve. To me, something creative that has
been done with love is to have done “good.”
Ibid.
 
On Humankind 177
Before God we are relatively all equally wise—
equally foolish.
In Cosmic Religion (1931), 105. Original source unknown.
The true value of a human being is determined primarily
by the measure and the sense in which he has
attained liberation from the self.
Ca. June 1932. Reprinted in Mein Weltbild, 10; and Ideas and
Opinions, 12
The minority, presently the ruling class, has the
school and the press, and usually the Church as
well, under its thumb. This enables it to organize
and sway the emotions of the masses, and use them
as its tool.
To Sigmund Freud, July 30, 1932. In Why War? 5. Einstein
Archive 32-543
In the last analysis, everyone is a human being,
whether he is an American or a German, a Jew or a
Gentile. If it were possible to hold only this worthy
point of view, I would be a happy man.
To Gerald Donahue, April 3, 1935. Einstein Archives
49-502
Man owes his strength in the struggle for existence to
the fact that he is a socially living animal. As little as
a battle between single ants of an ant hill is essential
 
178 The Quotations
for survival, just so little is this the case with individual
members of a human community.
From an address at the celebration of the tercentenary of
higher education in America at the State University of New
York in Albany, October 15, 1936. In School and Society 44
(1936), 589–592. Published as “On Education,” in Ideas and
Opinions, 62. Einstein Archives 29-080
A successful man is one who receives a great deal
from his fellow-men, usually incomparably more
than corresponds to his service to them. The value of
a man, however, should be seen in what he gives
and not in what he is able to receive.
Ibid.
*All religions, arts, and sciences are branches of the
same tree. All these aspirations are directed toward
ennobling man’s life, lifting it from the sphere of
mere physical existence and leading the individual
toward freedom.
Opening words to “Moral Decay,” a message to Young
Men’s Christian Association on its Founder’s Day, October
11, 1937. Quoted in Out of My Later Years, 16. Einstein
Archives 28-403
One misses the elementary reaction against injustice
and for justice—that reaction which in the long run
represents man’s only protection against a relapse
into barbarism.
From ibid.
 
On Humankind 179
When one looks at humankind today, one notices
with regret that quantity does not make up for quality:
if quantity could only substitute for quality, we
would be in better circumstances now than was Ancient
Greece.
To Ruth Norden, December 21, 1937. Einstein Archives
86-933
Common convictions and aims, similar interests,
will in every society produce groups that, in a certain
sense, act as units. There will always be friction
between such groups—the same sort of aversion
and rivalry that exists between individuals. . . . In
my opinion, uniformity in a population would not
be desirable, even if it were attainable.
From “Why Do They Hate the Jews?” Collier’s magazine,
November 26, 1938
*And yet I know that, all in all, man changes but little,
even though prevailing notions make him appear
in a very different light at different times, and
even though current trends like the present bring
him unimaginable sorrow. Nothing of all that will
remain but a few pitiful pages in the history books,
briefl y picturing to the youth of future generations
the follies of its ancestors.
From “Ten Fateful Years,” written for Clifton Fadiman’s
book, I Believe (1939). See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 312–314, for full text.
 
180 The Quotations
The ancients knew something that we seem to have
forgotten: that all means are but a blunt instrument
if they do not have a living spirit behind them.
From an address at Princeton Theological Seminary, May 19,
1939. Einstein Archives 28-493
It is better for people to be like the beasts . . . they
should be more intuitive; they should not be too
conscious of what they are doing while they are
doing it.
From a conversation recorded by Algernon Black, Fall
1940. Einstein forbade the publication of this conversation.
Einstein Archives 54-834
We have to do the best we are capable of. This is our
sacred human responsibility.
Ibid.
*The satisfaction of physical needs is indeed the indispensable
precondition of a satisfactory existence,
but in itself it is not enough. In order to be content,
men must also have the possibility of developing
their intellectual and artistic powers to whatever extent
accords with their personal characteristics and
abilities.
From “On Freedom,” ca. 1940, excerpted from “On Freedom
and Science,” in Ruth Anshen, Freedom: Its Meaning
(Harcourt, Brace, 1940). See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 433
 
On Humankind 181
*Only if outward and inner freedom are constantly
and consciously pursued is there a possibility of
spiritual development and perfection and thus of
improving man’s outward and inner life.
Ibid., 435
Perfection of means and confusion of goals seem, in
my opinion, to characterize our age.
From a broadcast recording for a science conference in
London, September 28, 1941. Einstein Archives 28-557
*I must confess that biographies have seldom attracted
me or captured my imagination. Autobiographies
mostly arise out of narcissism or negative
feelings toward others. Biographies from the pen of
another person tend in their psychological traits to
reflect the intellectual and spiritual nature of the
writer more than that of the person portrayed.
From the foreword to Philipp Frank, Einstein, and Albert
Einstein: Sein Leben und Seine Zeit. Foreword written ca.
1942. Einstein Archives 28-581
*The striving for truth and knowledge is one of the
highest of man’s qualities—though often the pride
is most loudly voiced by those who strive the least.
From an NBC radio broadcast, “The Goal of Human Existence,”
for the United Jewish Appeal, April 11, 1943. See
Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 322. Einstein Archives
28-587
 
182 The Quotations
*The feeling of what ought and ought not to be
grows and dies like a tree, and no fertilizer of any
kind will do very much good. The individual can
only give a fine example and have the courage to
uphold ethical convictions sternly in a society of
cynics.
To Max Born, September 7, 1944. In Born-Einstein Letters,
145. Einstein Archives 8-207
*We humans generally live under the illusion of security
and being at home and hearth in a trusting
and gracious physical and human environment.
When the daily rhythm is interrupted, however, we
realize we are like shipwrecked people trying to balance
ourselves on a wretched plank in the open sea,
forgetting where we came from and not knowing
how to steer.
To Mr. and Mrs. Held, who had lost a child or grandchild,
April 26, 1945. Einstein Archives 56-853
*One should strive to attain [individual freedom] to
the degree that this is compatible with the need to
protect the security of the individual and to provide
essential economic needs. In other words: the fi rst
priority is a secure life, and then comes fulfi llment
of the need for freedom.
From “Is There Room for Individual Freedom in a Socialist
State?” ca. July 1945. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 436. Einstein Archives 28-661
 
On Humankind 183
*He who is untrue to his own cause cannot command
the respect of others.
From a statement in Aufbau 11, no. 50 (December 14,
1945), 11
There is no greater satisfaction for a just and wellmeaning
person than the knowledge that he has devoted
his best energies to the service of a good
cause.
Closing words to “A Message to My Adopted Country,”
Pageant 1, no. 12 (January 1946), 36–37. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 476; Jerome and Taylor, Einstein
on Race and Racism, 141
*A large part of our attitude toward things is conditioned
by opinions and emotions which we unconsciously
absorb as children from our environment. In
other words, it is tradition—besides inherited aptitudes
and qualities—which makes us what we are. . . .
We must try to recognize what in our accepted tradition
is damaging to our fate and dignity—and
shape our lives accordingly.
Ibid.
*Man is born to hate in almost higher measure than
to love, and hate does not tire in taking grasp of any
available situation.
To Hans Muehsam, April 3, 1946. Einstein Archives
38-352
 
184 The Quotations
I think we have to safeguard ourselves against people
who are a menace to others, quite apart from
what may have motivated their deeds.
To Otto Juliusburger, April 11, 1946. Here Einstein was referring
specifi cally to Hitler. Einstein Archives 38-228
Perhaps there is something benevolent in the wasteful
sport that Nature, seemingly blindly, places on
her creatures. It can only be good to try to persuade
young people how critical that decision [marriage
and reproduction] is—often made at the moment
when Nature leaves us in a kind of drunken sensual
delusion so that we least have our good judgment
when we most need it.
To Hans Muehsam, June 4, 1946, on Einstein’s rejection of
any concerted effort to “improve” the human race. Einstein
Archives 38-356
*To act intelligently in human affairs is only possible
if an attempt is made to understand the thoughts,
motives, and apprehensions of one’s opponent so
fully that one can see the world through his eyes.
All well-meaning people should try to contribute
as much as possible to improving such mutual
understanding.
“A Reply to the Soviet Scientists,” December 1947, published
in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 4, no. 2 (February
1948), 35–37. See also Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 393
 
On Humankind 185
Man is, at one and the same time, a solitary being
and a social being. As a solitary being, he attempts
to protect his own existence and that of those who
are closest to him, to satisfy his personal desires,
and to develop his innate abilities. As a social being,
he seeks to gain the recognition and affection of his
fellow human beings, to share in their pleasures, to
comfort them in their sorrows, and to improve their
conditions of life.
From “Why Socialism?” Monthly Review, May 1949. See
Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 441. Einstein Archives
28-857
*Man can find meaning in life, short and perilous as
it is, only through devoting himself to society.
Ibid., 443
One is born into a herd of buffalos and must be glad
if one is not trampled underfoot before one’s time.
To Cornel Lanczos, July 9, 1952. Einstein Archives 15-320
[A man] must learn to understand the motives of
human beings, their illusions, and their sufferings in
order to acquire a proper relationship to individual
fellow-men and to the community.
From an interview with Benjamin Fine, New York Times,
October 5, 1952. Reprinted as “Education for Independent
Thought” in Ideas and Opinions, 66. Einstein Archives
59-666
 
186 The Quotations
What a person thinks on his own, without being
stimulated by the thoughts and experiences of other
people, is even in the best case rather paltry and
monotonous.
From an article in Der Jungkaufmann (Zurich) 27, no. 4
(1952), 73. Einstein Archives 28-927
You must be aware that most men (and also not only
a few women) are by nature not monogamous. This
nature makes itself even more forceful when tradition
and circumstance stand in an individual’s way.
To Eugenie Anderman, an unknown woman who was
seeking advice from Einstein regarding her husband’s infi -
delity, June 2, 1953. (Courtesy of Andor Carius.) Einstein
Archives 59-097
A forced faithfulness is a bitter fruit for all
concerned.
Ibid.
We all are nourished and housed by the work of
our fellowmen and we have to pay honestly for it
not only by the work we have chosen for the sake of
our inner satisfaction but by work which, according
to general opinion, serves them. Otherwise
we become parasites, however modest our needs
may be.
To a man who wanted to spend his time being subsidized
to study rather than work, July 28, 1953. Einstein Archives
59-180
 
On Humankind 187
*A large part of history is . . . replete with the struggle
for human rights, an eternal struggle in which a
fi nal victory can never be won. But to tire in that
struggle would mean the ruin of society.
From “Human Rights,” a message to the Chicago Decalogue
Society of Lawyers upon receiving its award for contributions
to human rights. The message had been written
just before December 5, 1953 (Einstein Archives 28-1012),
and was translated and recorded before being played at the
ceremony on February 20, 1954. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 497
The existence and validity of human rights are not
written in the stars.
Ibid.
To obtain an assured favorable response from people,
it is better to offer them something for their
stomachs instead of their brains.
To L. Manners, a chocolate manufacturer, March 19, 1954.
Einstein Archives 60-401
Fear or stupidity has always been the basis of most
human actions.
To E. Mulder, April 1954. Einstein Archives 60-609
*In matters concerning truth and justice there can be
no distinction between big problems and small; for
the general principles which determine the conduct
of men are indivisible. Whoever is careless with the
 
188 The Quotations
truth in small matters cannot be trusted in important
affairs.
From an undelivered message to the world, April 1955, intended
to address the Arab-Israeli confl ict. Einstein died
before he could fi nish and deliver the speech. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 506. Einstein Archives
28-1098.
The individual, if left alone from birth, would remain
primitive and beastlike in his thoughts and
feelings. . . . The individual is what he is . . . by virtue
[of being] a member of a great human community
that directs his material and spiritual existence
from cradle to grave.
From “Society and Personality,” in Ideas and Opinions, 13
Whoever undertakes to set himself up as a judge of
Truth and Knowledge is shipwrecked by the laughter
of the gods.
Aphorism in Essays Presented to Leo Baeck on the Occasion
of His Eightieth Birthday (London: East and West Library,
1954), 26. Leo Baeck was a rabbi and philosopher who led
the Jewish community in Germany during the time of Hitler.
See also the poem “The Wisdom of Dialectical Materialism”
in this volume. Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
457, translate the aphorism a bit differently in their
note. Einstein Archives 28-962
In order to be a perfect member of a flock of sheep,
one has to be, foremost, a sheep.
Ibid.
 
On Humankind 189
Hail to the man who went through life always helping
others, knowing no fear, and to whom aggressiveness
and resentment are alien. Such is the stuff
of which the great moral leaders are made.
Ibid.
The attempt to combine wisdom and power has
only rarely been successful, and then only for a short
while.
Ibid.
Few people are capable of expressing with equanimity
opinions that differ from the prejudices of
their social environment. Most people are even incapable
of forming such opinions.
Ibid.
 
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism,
and Zionism
 
 
In his youth, Einstein did not identify strongly with
Jewish culture and religion. His parents were assimilated
Jews in southern Germany who had distanced
themselves from their Jewish roots and were more
interested in the realities of entrepreneurship and
making a good living. However, he did receive private
religious instruction in Judaism at home and at
fi rst embraced it intensely, only to reject it decisively
by the age of twelve as his interest in science became
stronger. He then declared himself “without religious
affi liation.” He “rediscovered” his Jewish
roots after moving to Berlin and becoming aware of
the prejudicial treatment of eastern European Jews.
This was coincident both with the advent of antiSemitism
and Zionism and with the confi rmation of
his general theory of relativity in 1919, which
brought him worldwide fame. Einstein’s Zionism
was cultural rather than political. It emphasized the
cultural and spiritual renewal of the Jewish people,
as opposed to political Zionism, which focused on
the establishment of a Jewish state. Still, he supported
the creation of Israel as a refuge for Jews because
he believed in the power of a community as a
cohesive force and felt Jews should have a safe place
to study and teach. He favored a two-state solution
for Palestine, but realized there was no turning back
after the creation of Israel, and late in his life he supported
the new state even as he advocated fairness
to the Arabs. However, he also supported his friend
Erich Kahler in admonishing Arab landowners and
politicians who “did nothing to improve the nature,
the civilization, or the living standards of their countries”
(Princeton Herald, April 14 and 28, 1944).
See Schulmann, “Einstein Rediscovers Judaism”;
 
194 The Quotations
Stachel, “Einstein’s Jewish Identity”; and Jerome,
Einstein on Israel and Zionism.
It goes against the grain to travel without necessity
to a country in which my kinsmen have been persecuted
so brutally.
To P. P. Lazarev, May 16, 1914, responding to an invitation
from the Imperial Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg to
come to Russia to watch the 1914 total solar eclipse. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 7
One doesn’t know where to get one’s pleasure from
human affairs. I get most of my joy from the emergence
of the Jewish state in Palestine. It does seem to
me that our kinfolk are really more sympathetic (at
least less brutal) than those horrid Europeans.
To Paul Ehrenfest, March 22, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 10
I have great confidence in a positive development
for a Jewish state and am glad that there will be a
little patch of earth on which our brethren are not
considered aliens.
To Paul Epstein, October 5, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 122
One can be internationally minded without being
indifferent to one’s kinsmen.
Ibid.
I have warm sympathy for the affairs of the new
colony in Palestine and especially for the yet-to-be-
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 195
founded university. I shall gladly do everything in
my power for it.
To Hugo Bergmann, Zionist Organization London, November
5, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 155
From 16–18 January I have to be in Basel, where a
conference is being held to consult about the Hebrew
University to be founded in Palestine. I believe
that this undertaking deserves zealous collaboration.
To Michele Besso, December 12, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 207
*In my opinion, aversion to Jews is simply based
upon the fact that Jews and non-Jews are different. It
is the same feeling of aversion that is always found
when two nationalities have to deal with each other.
This aversion is a consequence of the existence of
Jews, not of any particular qualities. . . . The feeling
of aversion toward people of a foreign race with
whom one has, more or less, to share daily life will
emerge by necessity.
From “Assimilation and Anti-Semitism,” April 3, 1920.
CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 34. See also Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 144
I am neither a German citizen, nor do I believe in
anything that can be described as a “Jewish faith.”
But I am a Jew and glad to belong to the Jewish people,
though I do not regard it in any way as chosen.
 
196 The Quotations
To Central Association of German Citizens of the Jewish
Faith, April 3 [5], 1920. According to Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 146, the letter shows how Einstein disliked
the association’s tactic of self-defense. Published in
Israelitisches Wochenblatt, September 24, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 7,
Doc. 37, and Vol. 9, Doc. 368
*Only when we have the courage to regard ourselves
as a nation, only when we respect ourselves, can we
win the respect of others. . . . Anti-Semitism . . . will
always be with us as long as Jews and non-Jews are
thrown together. It may be thanks to anti-Semitism
that we owe our survival as a race; that at any rate is
what I believe.
Ibid.
*As much as I feel myself to be a Jew, I stand aloof
from the traditional religious rites.
To Jewish Community of Berlin, December 22, 1920. CPAE,
Vol. 9, Doc. 238
*The word “Jewish” has two meanings: it has to do
with (1) nationality and descent; (2) religion. I am a
Jew in the fi rst sense but not in the second.
To Jewish Community of Berlin, January 5, 1921. CPAE,
Vol. 12, Doc. 8
I am not at all eager to go to America but am doing
it only in the interests of the Zionists, who must
beg for dollars to build educational institutions in
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 197
Jerusalem and for whom I act as high priest and
decoy. . . . But I do what I can to help those in my
tribe who are treated so badly everywhere.
To Maurice Solovine, March 8, 1921. Published in Letters to
Solovine, 41. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 85
*Naturally they don’t need me for my abilities but
because of my name, whose luster they hope will
attract quite a bit of success with the rich kinsmen
of Dollar-land. In spite of my emphatic internationalism,
I believe that I am always under an obligation
insofar as it is in my power to advocate on
behalf of my persecuted and morally oppressed
kinsmen.
To Fritz Haber, March 9, 1921. The letter is in regard to the
Zionist Organization’s request that Einstein accompany
some of its members on a fund-raising trip to America for
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 148. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 88
*I confidently believe that the Jews will be prevented
by the smallness and the dependency of their Palestinian
colony from becoming obsessed with power.
To Maurice Solovine, March 16, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12,
Doc. 100
I know of no public event that has given me such
pleasure as the proposal to establish a Hebrew University
in Jerusalem. The traditional respect for
knowledge that Jews have maintained intact through
 
198 The Quotations
many centuries of severe hardship has made it particularly
painful for us to see so many talented sons
of the Jewish people cut off from higher education.
From an interview, New York Times, April 3, 1921. See similar
remarks with respect to Brandeis University, below.
*Your leader, Dr. Weizmann, has spoken, and he has
spoken very well for us all. Follow him and you will
do well. That is all I have to say.
The full extent of a speech at a reception in New York for the
Zionist Mission to America, April 12, 1921. Quoted in the
New York Times, April 13, 1921, 13. See Illy, Albert Meets
America, 91
*[I hope] that you do not mean that the teaching and
the research of our future professors at Jerusalem are
to be bound by the orthodox Jewish laws or conceptions.
. . . Any such restriction of the freedom of
speech or thought would be intolerable (except, perhaps,
in a frankly theological institute or department)
and would defeat your own purpose—to further
a free and creative synthesis of faith and reason.
To Solomon Rosenbloom, April 27, 1921, on the Hebrew
University in Jerusalem. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 127
*The Hebrew university in Palestine will become a
new “holy place” to our people.
Chicago Herald and Examiner, May 8, 1921, part 2, 3. See also
Illy, Albert Meets America, 156
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 199
*Is it conceivable that, in addition to the tragedy of
Jewish science without a home, there could exist a
Jewish national home without science? The traditional
pride of the Jewish people in their learned
men would never suffer such humiliation.
Ibid., 158
*Zionism really represents a new Jewish ideal, one
that can give the Jewish people renewed joy in existence.
. . . I am very glad I accepted Weizmann’s invitation.
Some places, however, exhibit an overly
intense Jewish nationalism that threatens to degenerate
into intolerance and narrow-mindedness; but
hopefully this is just a childhood disease.
To Paul Ehrenfest, June 18, 1921, on Einstein’s fund-raising
tour of the United States with Chaim Weizmann on behalf
of the Hebrew University. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 152
Anti-Semitism in Germany also has consequences
that, from a Jewish point of view, should be welcomed.
I believe German Jewry owes its continued
existence to anti-Semitism. . . . Without this distinction,
the assimilation of Jews in Germany would
happen quickly and unimpeded.
From “How I Became a Zionist,” Jüdische Rundschau,
June 21, 1921. Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 151.
CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 57
As long as I lived [in Switzerland], I was not aware
of my Jewishness. . . . This changed as soon as I took
 
200 The Quotations
up residence in Berlin. . . . I saw how anti-Semitic
surroundings prevented [Jews] from pursuing regular
studies and how they struggled for a secure
existence.
Ibid.
I am not a Jew in the sense that I call for the preservation
of the Jewish or any other nationality as an
end in itself. I rather see Jewish nationality as a fact
and I believe that every Jew must draw the consequences
from this fact. I consider raising Jewish selfesteem
essential, also in the interest of a natural coexistence
with non-Jews. This was my major motive
for joining the Zionist movement. . . . But my Zionism
does not preclude cosmopolitan views.
Ibid., 152
Zionism, to me, is not just a colonizing movement
directed toward Palestine. The Jewish nation is a living
fact in Palestine as well as in the Diaspora, and
Jewish national feelings must be kept alive wherever
Jews live. . . . I believe that every Jew has an
obligation toward his fellow Jews.
Ibid., 152–153
*By leading Jews back to Palestine and restoring a
healthy and normal economic existence, Zionism
represents a productive activity that enriches all of
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 201
society. . . . [It] strengthens Jewish dignity and selfesteem,
which are critical for existence in the Diaspora
[and] . . . creates a strong bond that gives Jews
a sense of self. I have always found repulsive the
undignifi ed addiction to conformity of many of my
peers.
Ibid., 153
*To my knowledge this isn’t planned. But since
classes will be conducted in Hebrew, and because of
the nationalist tendencies of its founders, in practical
terms the [Hebrew] university will become a
Jewish institution.
In answer to the question if the Hebrew University will
be open only to Jews. From an interview in Vorwärts (Berlin),
morning edition, June 30, 1921. See also letter to Solomon
Rosenblooom, April 27, 1921, above. CPAE, Vol. 12,
Appendix F
*I believe that membership in a religious denomination
is unimportant. But among us Jews the conversion
to a different religion is a symbolic act that implies
that one wants to dissociate oneself from one’s
group. But one can well be undenominational without
being disloyal to one’s people. I myself am nonobservant
[konfessionslos], yet consider myself a loyal Jew.
To Emil Starkenstein, July 14, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 181
Where dull-witted kinsmen were praying aloud,
their faces turned to the wall, their bodies rocking to
 
202 The Quotations
and fro. A pathetic sight of men with a past having
no place in present times.
On his visit to the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, February 3,
1923, recorded in his travel diary. Einstein Archives 29-129
to 29-131
The heart says yes, but the mind says no.
From his Travel Diary, February 13, 1923, on the invitation
to accept a position at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
In ibid. Also quoted in Hoffmann, “Einstein and Zionism,”
241. Einstein Archives 29-129
It is of no use to try to convince others of our spiritual
and intellectual equality by way of reason, since
the others’ attitude does not come by way of their
brains. We must instead emancipate ourselves socially
and satisfy our own social requirements.
From “Anti-Semitism and Academic Youth,” April 1923. Reprinted
in Ideas and Opinions, 188. Einstein Archives 28-016
*On the whole, the country [Palestine] is not very fertile.
It will become a moral center, but will not be able
to absorb a large proportion of the Jewish people.
To Maurice Solovine, May 20, 1923. Einstein often spoke of
Palestine as a “moral center,” in which he envisioned a
place of study and research for Jews without the onus of
anti-Semitism. Einstein Archives 21-189
*By recalling to memory a past filled with glory and
sorrow and by opening their eyes to a healthier, dig-
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 203
nified future, Zionism can teach them self-knowledge
and instill courage. It restores the moral force, which
allows them to live and act in dignity. It frees the
soul from the unforgivable feeling of exaggerated
modesty, which can only oppress and make them
unproductive. Finally it reminds them that the centuries
they have lived through in common sorrow
enjoins upon them the duty of solidarity.
From “Mission,” in Jüdische Rundschau 14 (February 17,
1925), 129. First published in La Revue Juive (Geneva), January
15, 1925. See also Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
164–165. In this essay, according to Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein conceives of Palestine as “a model for a
worldwide community of purpose based on international
solidarity.”
*The existence of this moral homeland will, I hope,
succeed in imparting more vitality to a people that
does not deserve to die. . . . For this reason I believe
that I am able to assert that Zionism, which appears
to be a nationalistic movement, has, when it comes
down to it, a significant role to play for all mankind.
Ibid.
A Jew who strives to impregnate his spirit with humanitarian
ideals can declare himself a Zionist without
contradiction. What one must be thankful for to
Zionism is that it is the only movement that has
given Jews a justifi ed pride.
Ibid.
 
204 The Quotations
Our Jews are up to much down there [Jerusalem]
and are fighting among one another as usual. I actually
have quite a bit to do with all of this because—
as you know—I have become a Jewish saint.
To Michele Besso, December 25, 1925. Einstein Archives
7-356. The tongue-in-cheek “Jewish saint” reference also
appears in a letter to sons Hans Albert and Eduard, November
24, 1923 (see above, “On Einstein Himself”). In a
letter to Paul Ehrenfest of May 4, 1920, he joked that “the
bones of the saint were requested to be present” at a conference
in Halle later that month.
*In the past our Jewish people have remained bound
together by our traditions. They have had to pay for
the blessings of this bond through a cultural narrowness
that has led to vast spiritual and worldly
limitations. Can this harm be undone without endangering
ethnic survival? I think the following is
possible: the life of the individual and community
can proceed according to tradition; thinking should
be allowed without restraint except as limited by
the human mind.
Foreword, written in German, to a Yiddish book on relativity
by Tuvia Shalit, The Special Theory of Relativity: Einstein’s System
and Minkowski’s “World” (Berlin: Self-published, 1927).
(Thanks to Eli Maor for sending me the German original.)
*All Jewish children [in Palestine] should be obligated
to learn Arabic.
To Hugo Bergmann, September 27, 1929. Einstein Archives
37-768
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 205
Zionism is a nationalism which does not strive for
power but for dignity and recovery.
Ibid.
*The Jews are a community bound together by ties
of blood and tradition, and not of religion only: the
attitude of the rest of the world toward them is
sufficient proof of this. When I came to Germany
fi fteen years ago I discovered for the first time
that I was a Jew, and I owe this more to Gentiles
than Jews.
To Willy Hellpach, a noted psychologist and liberal politician
during the Weimar era, October 8, 1929. See also Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 170. Einstein Archives
46-656
If we did not have to live among intolerant, narrowminded,
and violent people, I would be the fi rst
to discard all nationalism in favor of a universal
humanity.
Ibid.
I am a determinist. As such, I do not believe in Free
Will. The Jews believe in Free Will. They believe that
man shapes his own life. I reject that doctrine philosophically.
In that respect I am not a Jew.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 441
 
206 The Quotations
Should we be unable to find a way to honest cooperation
and honest pacts with the Arabs, then we have
learned absolutely nothing from our 2,000 years of
suffering and will deserve our fate.
To Chaim Weizmann, November 25, 1929. Einstein Archives
33-411
*One who, like myself, has cherished the conviction
that humanity of the future must be built on an intimate
community of all nations, and that aggressive
nationalism must be conquered, can see a future for
Palestine only on the basis of peaceful cooperation
between the two peoples who are at home in the
country. For this reason I should have expected that
the great Arab people will show a truer appreciation
of the need which the Jews feel to rebuild their national
home in the ancient seat of Judaism.
Letter to the Palestinian Arab paper Falastin, December 20,
1929, published February 1, 1930. Einstein Archives 46-148
Jewry has proved throughout history that the intellect
is the best weapon. . . . It is our duty as Jews
to put at the disposal of the world our severalthousand-year-old
sorrowful experience and, true
to the ethical traditions of our forefathers, become
soldiers in the fight for peace, united with the noblest
elements in all cultural and religious circles.
Quoted in Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, 156. Frank
attributes the passage to a speech given at a “Jewish
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 207
meeting” in Berlin in 1929, though there is no trace of it in
the archives.
The Jewish religion is . . . a way of sublimating everyday
existence. . . . It demands no act of faith—in
the popular sense of the term—on the part of its
members. And for that reason there has never been
a conflict between our religious outlook and the
world outlook of science.
From “Science and God: A Dialogue,” Forum and Century
83 (June 1930), 373
*Embedded in the tradition of the Jewish people
there is a love of justice and reason which must continue
to work for the good of all nations now and in
the future.
From “The Jewish Community,” a speech delivered at
the Savoy Hotel, attended by George Bernard Shaw,
H. G. Wells, and Lord Rothschild, October 29, 1930. See
Ideas and Opinions, 174. Einstein Archives 29-033
*By means of modern methods of reconstruction,
Palestine affords ample room for both Jews and
Arabs, who can live side by side in peace and harmony
in a common country. I believe that the setbacks
of last year must strengthen within us the recognition
of our duty to improve, through patience
and continued efforts, our relations with the Arab
people and to convince them of the advantages Zionism
creates for them.
 
208 The Quotations
In “Redoubling Efforts,” New York Times, December 3, 1930.
From an interview given in Berlin to the Jüdische Rundschau
shortly before leaving for the United States. See also Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 186
*[The] unity of Jews the world over is in no wise a
political unity and should never become such. It
rests exclusively on a moral tradition. Out of this
alone can the Jewish people maintain its creative
powers, and on this alone it claims its basis for
existence.
From “The Jewish Mission in Palestine,” radio address
organized by the American Student Zionist Federation,
which agreed with Einstein’s cultural and socialist views
for a Jewish state, December 13, 1930. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 187. Einstein Archives
28-121
Judaism is not a creed: the Jewish God is simply a
negation of superstition, an imaginary result of its
elimination. It is also an attempt to base moral law
on fear, a regrettable and discreditable attempt. Yet
it seems to me that the strong moral tradition of the
Jewish nation has to a large extent shaken itself free
from this fear. It is clear also that “serving God” was
equated with “serving the living.” The best of the
Jewish people, especially the Prophets and Jesus,
contended tirelessly for this.
From “Is There a Jewish Point of View?” Opinion, September
26, 1932; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 186. Einstein
Archives 28-197
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 209
Judaism seems to me to be concerned almost exclusively
with the moral attitude in life and toward
life. . . . The essence of that conception seems to me
to lie in an affirmative attitude toward the life of all
creation.
Ibid., 185. As refl ected in this and similar statements, Einstein
rejected any racial or other biological sanctions for Judaism;
rather, he saw it primarily as an attitude toward life.
See Stachel, “Einstein’s Jewish Identity,” for a discussion
about Einstein’s rejection of any taint of race in his concept
of Judaism.
I consider the formation of labor unions . . . necessary
for Palestine. For the working class is not only
the very soul of construction work, but it is the only
truly effective bridge between the Jews and Arabs.
To Irma Lindheim, president of the Jewish women’s organization,
Hadassah, February 2, 1933. Einstein Archives
50-990
The Jews resemble an uncondensable noble gas that
can assume a substantial form of existence only by
adhering to a firm object. This applies to me as well.
But perhaps it is in this very chemical inertia that
our ability to act and to persist lies.
To Paul Ehrenfest, June 1933. Einstein Archives 10-260
The pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, an almost
fanatical love of justice, and the desire for personal
independence—these are the features of the
 
210 The Quotations
Jewish tradition which make me thank my lucky
stars that I belong to it.
From “Jewish Ideals,” written for the French periodical
VU/ Temoignages: Les Juifs in August 1933; reprinted in Mein
Weltbild, 89, and Ideas and Opinions, 185
*In these days of the persecution of the German Jews
especially it is time to remind the western world
that it owes to the Jewish people (a) its religion and
therewith its most valuable moral ideals, and (b), to
a large extent, the resurrection of the world of Greek
thought.
Written for the French periodical Cahiers Juifs in 1933; reprinted
in The World as I See It under the title “A Foreword”
and in Mein Weltbild as “Deutsche und Juden.” Einstein Archives
28-242
*Today the Jews of Germany find their fairest consolation
in the thought of all they have produced and
achieved for humanity by their efforts in modern
times as well; and no oppression however brutal, no
campaign of calumny however subtle will blind
those who have eyes to see the intellectual and
moral qualities inherent in this people.
Ibid.
*We all know that the Jewish people has sustained
itself through 2,000 years of severe hardships because
it has regarded a tradition of love for the spiritual
and moral as its highest possession.
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 211
From the acceptance speech for an honorary degree at Yeshiva
College, October 8, 1934. Quoted in Yeshiva University
News (online), October 31, 2005
*Palestine will be a center of culture for all Jews, a
refuge for the most grievously oppressed, a field of
action for the best among us, a unifying ideal, and a
means of attaining inward health for the Jews of the
whole world.
An appeal for “Keren Hajessod,” in Mein Weltbild (1934),
102, and Ideas and Opinions, 184
There are no German Jews, there are no Russian
Jews, there are no American Jews. Their only difference
is their daily language. There are in fact only
Jews.
From a speech at a Purim dinner at the German-Jewish
Club in New York, March 24, 1935, reprinted shortly
thereafter in the New York Herald Tribune. A reader took
issue with this statement and asked Einstein to explain
what he meant. See the next quotation for a partial
answer.
Seen through the eyes of the historian, their history
of suffering teaches us that the fact of being a Jew
has had a greater impact than the fact of belonging
to political communities. If, for example, the German
Jews were driven from Germany, they would
cease to be Germans and would change their language
and their political affiliation; but they would
 
212 The Quotations
remain Jews. . . . I see the reason not so much in racial
characteristics as in firmly rooted traditions that
are by no means limited to the area of religion.
To Gerald Donahue, April 3, 1935. Note, however, that Einstein
himself continued to speak the German language
even after he was driven from Germany. Einstein Archives
49-502
Materialistic shallowness is a far greater menace to
the survival of the Jew than the numerous external
foes who threaten his existence with violence.
From a message for a testimonial dinner, June 7, 1936.
Quoted in the New York Times, June 8, 1936. Einstein Archives
28-357
*I should much rather see reasonable agreement with
the Arabs on the basis of living together in peace
than the creation of a Jewish state. Apart from practical
consideration, my awareness of the essential nature
of Judaism resists the idea of a Jewish state with
borders, an army, and a measure of temporal power
no matter how modest. I am afraid of the inner damage
Judaism will sustain—especially from the development
of a narrow nationalism within our own
ranks, against which we have already had to fi ght
strongly, even without a Jewish state. We are no longer
the Jews of the Maccabee period.
From a speech titled “Our Debt to Zionism,” before the National
Labor Committee for Palestine on April 17, 1938, in
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 213
New York. Full text published in New Palestine 28, no. 16
(April 29, 1938), 2–4. Also see Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 300–302. Einstein Archives 28-427
Judaism owes a great debt of gratitude to Zionism.
The Zionist movement has revived among Jews a
sense of community. It has performed productive
work . . . in Palestine, to which self-sacrificing Jews
throughout the world have contributed. . . . In particular,
it has been possible to lead a not inconsiderable
part of our youth toward a life of joyous and
creative work.
Ibid., 300
To be a Jew, after all, means, first of all, to acknowledge
and follow in practice those fundamentals in
humaneness laid down in the Bible—fundamentals
without which no sound and happy community can
exist.
Ibid.
The Jews as a group may be powerless, but the
sum of the achievements of their individual members
is everywhere considerable and telling, even
though those achievements were made in the face of
obstacles.
From “Why Do They Hate the Jews?” Collier’s magazine,
November 26, 1938. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 197
 
214 The Quotations
[The Nazis] see the Jews as a nonassimilable element
that cannot be driven into uncritical acceptance
and that . . . threatens their authority because
of its insistence on popular enlightenment of the
masses.
Ibid.
The Jew who abandons his faith (in the formal sense
of the word) is in a position similar to a snail that
abandons its shell. He remains a Jew.
Ibid.
The bond that has united the Jews for thousands of
years and that unites them today is, above all, the
democratic ideal of social justice, coupled with the
ideal of mutual aid and tolerance among all men. . . .
The second characteristic of Jewish tradition is the
high regard in which it holds every form of intellectual
aspiration and spiritual effort.
Ibid.
*In the past we were persecuted despite the fact that
we were the people of the Bible; today, however, it is
just because we are the people of the Book.
From a CBS radio address for the United Jewish Appeal,
March 21, 1939. See also Jerome, Einstein on Israel and Zionism,
141. Einstein Archives 28-475
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 215
The power of resistance which has enabled the Jewish
people to survive for thousands of years has
been based to a large extent on traditions of mutual
helpfulness. In these years of affliction our readiness
to help one another is being put to an especially severe
test. May we stand this test as well as did our
fathers before us. We have no other means of selfdefense
than our solidarity and our knowledge that
the cause for which we are suffering is a momentous
and sacred cause.
To Alfred Hellman, June 10, 1939. Einstein Archives 53-391
*I dislike Nationalism very much—even Jewish Nationalism.
But our own national solidarity is forced
upon us by a hostile world and not by the aggressive
feelings which we connect with the word.
To Judge Jerome Frank, November 19, 1945. See Jerome,
Einstein on Israel and Zionism, 157. Einstein Archives 35-071
*The cause for the fact that we Jews are a “separate
people” is not only that we have the desire to set
oursel[ves] apart, but that we are treated and persecuted
as a separate people.
Ibid.
*The Jewish people are united not only through a
common religion but also through common dangers
 
216 The Quotations
and common problems of a political and social
nature.
To Rabbi Louis Wolsey, November 20, 1945. Einstein Archives
35-075
*The enterprise to settle 30,000 Jewish war orphans
in Birobidjan and secure for them . . . a satisfying
and happy future is new proof for the humane attitude
of Russia towards our Jewish people.
From a statement on Birobidjan, an autonomous Jewish region
in Russia, December 10, 1945. Cited in Jerome, Einstein
on Israel and Zionism, 158. Einstein Archives 56-517
*I was never in favor of a state. The [Jewish] state
idea is not according to my heart. I cannot understand
why it is needed. It is connected with many
diffi culties and narrow-mindedness. I believe it
is bad.
Einstein’s answer to a question posed by the AngloAmerican
Committee of Inquiry in Washington, established
to assess the feasibility of Jewish immigration to
Palestine and how it would affect both Arabs and Jews,
January 11, 1946. Einstein favored a trusteeship of several
nations to administer Palestine, to be set up by the United
Nations, rather than a political state. Much of the hearing is
reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 340–
344. According to Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein accepted
the Jewish state “as the inevitable consequence of Britain’s
failure to create a workable political settlement in which
Arabs and Jews could live together in peace” (p. 38). A full
transcription of the proceedings is in Jerome, Einstein on Israel
and Zionism, 161–175
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 217
*The difficulties between the Jews and the Arabs are
artifi cially created, and are created by the English.
Ibid. Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 340
*If we had power it might be worse still. We imitate
the stupid nationalism and racial nonsense of the
goyim even after having gone through a school of
suffering without equal.
Ibid., 346
Zionism gave the German Jews no great protection
against annihilation. But it did give the survivors
the inner strength to endure the debacle with dignity
and without losing their healthy self-respect.
To Charles Adler, an anti-Zionist Jew, probably January
1946. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the
Human Side, 64. Einstein Archives 56-435
*Animals without wings take care not to change
their habitat unless the need arises. It follows that
well-established groups must seek out the best environment
when nothing stands in their way.
To Hans Muehsam, April 3, 1946. Einstein Archives
38-352
Under existing conditions, our young scientific talents
frequently have no access to scholarly professions,
which means that our proudest tradition—the
appreciation of productive work—would be faced
 
218 The Quotations
with slow extinction if we remain as inactive in this
area as in the past.
To David Lilienthal, July 1946, on his approval of the
founding of Brandeis University to serve Jewish students.
Within a year he added that it should “not know of discrimination
for or against anybody because of sex, color,
creed, national origin, or political opinion.” In 1953, he refused
an honorary doctorate from the institution because
of some personal disputes he had had with the founders
in 1947. Einstein Archives 40-398, 40-432. See also
S. S. Schweber, “Albert Einstein and the Founding of
Brandeis University,” unpublished manuscript.
*We advocated irresponsible and unjust gains in
Palestine under the influence of demagogues and
erstwhile blowhards. . . . We are imitating the goyim
in their idiotic nationalism and racism.
To Hans Muehsam, January 22, 1947. Einstein Archives
38-361
The plight of the surviving victims of German persecution
bears witness to the degree to which the
moral conscience of mankind has weakened. Today’s
meeting shows that not all men are prepared
to accept the horror in silence.
From a message on the dedication of the Riverside Drive
Memorial, New York, to the victims of the Holocaust, October
19, 1947. Einstein Archives 28-777
*I also think that in these latter years an agreement
between us and the Arabs that could have led to a
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 219
two-state solution was no longer possible. In the
past—essentially since 1918—we have ignored the
Arabs and entrusted them repeatedly to the English.
I have never held the idea of a [Jewish] state to be
desirable, for civic, political, and military reasons.
But now there is no going back and [the situation]
must be wrangled with.
To Hans and Minna Muehsam, September 24, 1948. Einstein
Archives 38-380
The wisdom and moderation the leaders of the new
state have shown gives me confidence that gradually
relations will be established with the Arab people
which are based on fruitful cooperation and mutual
respect and trust. For this is the only means
through which both peoples can attain true independence
from the outside world.
From a statement to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
upon receipt of an honorary doctorate, March 15, 1949. Einstein
Archives 28-854, 37-296
This university is today a living thing, a home of
free learning and teaching and happy collegial work.
There it is, on the soil that our people have liberated
under great hardships; there it is, a spiritual center
of a flourishing and buoyant community whose accomplishments
have finally met with the universal
recognition they deserve.
Ibid.
 
220 The Quotations
Zionism in 1921 strove for the establishment of a national
home, not the foundation of a state in the political
sense. However, this latter aim has been realized
because of the pressure of necessity rather than
emergency. To discuss this development retrospectively
seems to be academic. As far as the attitude
commonly described as “orthodoxy” is concerned, I
never had much sympathy for it. Nor do I think it
plays an important role now, or that it is likely to in
the future.
In answer to interviewer Alfred Werner’s question about
his support of Zionism in the establishment of Israel as a
secular state, in Liberal Judaism 16 (April–May 1949), 4–12
I must be very careful not to do any foolish thing or
to write any foolish book in order to live up to that
distinction. I am proud of the honor, not on my own
account, but because I am a Jew. It certainly denotes
progress when a Christian church honors a Jewish
scientist.
Referring to his sculptured image over the main entrance
of Riverside Church in New York City, which also depicts
other immortal leaders of humanity. Ibid. Riverside
Church, modeled after the thirteenth-century cathedral in
Chartres, France, was completed in 1930 and is
interdenominational.
The Jews of Palestine did not fight for political independence
for its own sake, but they fought to achieve
free immigration for the Jews of many countries
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 221
where their very existence was in danger; free immigration
also for all those who were longing for a
life among their own. It is no exaggeration to say
that they fought to make possible a sacrifice that is
perhaps unique in history.
From an NBC radio broadcast for a United Jewish Appeal
conference, Atlantic City, November 27, 1949. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 353. Einstein Archives
28-862
*It was much less our own fault or that of our neighbors
than of the Mandatory Power, that we did not
achieve an undivided Palestine in which Jews and
Arabs would live as equals, free, in peace. If one nation
dominates other nations, as was the case in the
British Mandate over Palestine, she can hardly avoid
following the notorious device of divide et impera.
Ibid.
The support for cultural life is of primary concern to
the Jewish people. We would not be in existence
today as a people without this continued activity in
learning.
From a statement on the occasion of the twenty-fi fth anniversary
of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Quoted in
the New York Times, May 11, 1950
Jewry is a group of people with a common history
and with certain traditions besides the religious one.
They are united by common interests created and
 
222 The Quotations
maintained by the outside world through a mostly
antagonistic attitude called prejudice.
To Alan E. Mayers, a Princeton University student,
October 20, 1950. (Thanks to Mr. Mayers for sending the
letter to me.) Einstein Archives 83-831
*I am deeply moved by the offer from the State of Israel.
. . . All my life I have dealt with objective matters,
hence I lack both the natural aptitude and the
experience to deal properly with people and to exercise
official functions. For these reasons alone I should
be unable to fulfill the duties of that high offi ce. . . .
My relationship to the Jewish people has become
my strongest human bond, ever since I became fully
aware of our precarious situation among the nations
of the world.
From a statement to Abba Eban, Israeli ambassador to the
United States, November 18, 1952, in declining the offer of
the presidency of Israel. Einstein Archives 28-943
*It also occurred to me that a difficult situation could
arise if the government or the parliament were to
make decisions that would bring my conscience into
confl ict; for the fact that one has no actual infl uence
on the course of events does not relieve one of moral
responsibility. I am also convinced I would have
done a disservice to the cause if I had answered this
honorable and tempting call to duty.
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 223
To Azriel Carlebach, the editor of Maariv, who had pleaded
with Einstein to reconsider the offer of the presidency, November
21, 1952. Einstein Archives 41-093
For the young state to achieve real independence,
and to conserve it, a group of intellectuals and experts
must be produced in the country itself.
From an address recorded on May 11, 1953, for a dinner for
Friends of Hebrew University. Quoted in the New York
Times, May 25, 1953. Einstein Archives 28-987
The Israelis should have chosen English as their language
instead of Hebrew. That would have been
much better, but they were too fanatical.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” January
2, 1954
*For me, the Jewish religion, like all others, is the embodiment
of the most childish superstition. And the
Jewish people, to whom I gladly belong and with
whose way of thinking I share a great affinity, have
for me qualities that are no different from all other
peoples. In my experience, they are no better than
other [ethnic] groups, though they are protected from
the worst diseases by a dearth of power. Otherwise I
cannot discern anything “chosen” about them.
From a letter to philosopher Eric Gutkind, January 3, 1954.
See more in the section “On Religion.” The half-page handwritten
letter fetched £170,000 ($404,000) at a Bloomsbury
 
224 The Quotations
auction in London on May 15, 2008, a record for a single
Einstein letter and twenty-fi ve times the presale estimate.
New York Times, May 17, 2008. Einstein Archives 33-337
The German Jews are really terrible, returning to
Germany. Even Martin Buber went to Germany and
allowed himself to be celebrated with a Goethe Prize
[awarded in 1951]. These people are so conceited.
I’ve turned them all down and gave them a kick in
the rear.
Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” February 12, 1954.
On February 23, the New York Times (p. 5) reported that
“Einstein will not join any function of German public life
because of crimes of Hitler Germany.”
Israel is the only place on Earth where Jews have the
possibility to shape public life according to their
own traditional ideals.
From an address at a planning conference of American
Friends of the Hebrew University, in Princeton, New Jersey,
September 19, 1954. Einstein Archives 28-1054
The most important aspect of our [Israel’s] policy
must be our ever-present, manifest desire to institute
complete equality for the Arab citizens living
in our midst. . . . The attitude we adopt toward the
Arab minority will provide the real test of our moral
standards as a people.
To Zvi Lurie, January 4, 1955, written three months before
Einstein’s death. Einstein Archives 60-388
 
On Jews, Israel, Judaism, Zionism 225
If I were to be president, sometimes I would have to
say to the Israeli people things they would not like
to hear.
To Margot Einstein, on his decision to turn down the presidency
of Israel. Quoted in Sayen, Einstein in America, 247
*I am against nationalism but in favor of Zionism. . . .
When a man has both arms and he is always saying
I have a right arm, then he is a chauvinist. When the
right arm is missing, however, then he must do all in
his power to make up for the missing limb. Therefore,
I am, as a human being, an opponent of nationalism,
but as a Jew I support . . . the Jewish-national
efforts of the Zionists.
Quoted by Kurt Blumenfeld, in Erlebte Judenfrage. Ein Vierteljahrhundert
deutscher Zionismus (Stuttgart: Deutshe
Verlags-Anstalt), 127–128
 
 
On Life
 
 
*Life doesn’t make things easy for anyone. But it is
lucky when we are able to emerge from our own uncomfortable
confines to some extent and focus on
objective matters that are beyond the wretchedness
of life.
To Adriaan Fokker, July 30, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 78
The finest things in life include having a clear grasp
of correlations. One can deny this only in a very dismal,
nihilistic mood.
To Hedwig Born, August 31, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 97
If there is no price to be paid, it is also not of value.
Aphorism, June 27, 1927. Einstein Archives 35-582
*Life in the service of an idea can be good if this idea
is life-giving and emancipates the individual from
the fetters of the self without propelling him into a
different bondage. Science and art can work this
way, but they can also lead to enslavement or unhealthy
pampering and overrefinement. But I would
not dispute the notion that these efforts lead to an
inability to cope with life. After all, even water is a
poison if you drown in it.
To son Eduard, December 23, 1927. Translated in Neffe,
Einstein, 194. Einstein Archives 75-748
 
230 The Quotations
*If A is success in life, then A  x  y  z. Work is x,
play is y, and z is keeping your mouth shut.
Said to Samuel J. Woolf in Berlin, Summer 1929. Published
in the New York Times, August 18, 1929. Einstein often
spoke about keeping one’s mouth shut. See, for example,
his remarks about listening to music in the section “On
Music.”
*Sometimes one pays most for things one gets for
nothing.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 434
Life is a great tapestry. The individual is only an insignifi
cant thread in an immense and miraculous
pattern.
Ibid., 444
Strange is our situation here on Earth. Each of us
comes for a short visit, not knowing why, yet sometimes
seeming to divine a purpose. . . .There is one
thing we do know: that man is here for the sake of
other men.
Opening words of “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84
(1930), 193–194. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 226–230, for the whole essay and background information.
Different versions of the essay have appeared
in various publications, sometimes under the title “My
Credo.”
 
On Life 231
Only a life lived for others is a life worthwhile.
In answer to a question asked by the editors of Youth, a
journal of Young Israel of Williamsburg, N.Y. Quoted in the
New York Times, June 20, 1932. Einstein Archives 29-041
The life of the individual has meaning only insofar
as it aids in making the life of every living thing nobler
and more beautiful. Life is sacred, that is to say,
it is the supreme value, to which all other values are
subordinate.
From “Is There a Jewish Point of View?”August 3, 1932.
Published in Mein Weltbild (1934), 89–90; reprinted in Ideas
and Opinions, 185–187
Every reminiscence is colored by today’s being what
it is, and therefore by a deceptive point of view.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 3
*Life is short, and the boulder against which one
pushes with all one’s might moves from its spot
only with long intermissions.
To Hans Muehsam, January 22, 1947. Einstein Archives
38-361
Personal existence makes sense through the conviction
of the objective value of one’s own strife and
action. But if this conviction is not softened by
humor, one becomes insufferable.
To Johanna Fantova, October 9, 1948. One of three aphorisms
sent to her. Einstein Archives 87-034
 
232 The Quotations
A life directed chiefly toward the fulfillment of personal
desires will sooner or later always lead to bitter
disappointment.
To T. Lee, January 16, 1954. Einstein Archives 60-235
If you want to live a happy life, tie it to a goal, not to
people or objects.
Quoted by Ernst Straus in French, Einstein: A Centenary
Volume, 32
 
On Music
 
 
Bach, Mozart, and some old Italian and English
composers were Einstein’s favorites; also Schubert,
because of the composer’s ability to express emotion.
He was considerably less fond of Beethoven,
regarding his music as too dramatic and personal.
Handel, he felt, was technically good but displayed
shallowness. Schumann’s shorter works were appealing
because they were original and rich in feeling.
Mendelssohn demonstrated considerable talent
but lacked depth. Einstein liked some lieder and
chamber music by Brahms. He found Wagner’s musical
personality indescribably offensive “so that for
the most part I can listen to him only with disgust.”
He considered Richard Strauss gifted but without
inner truth and concerned too much with outside effect.
(From a response to a questionnaire, May 1939.
Einstein Archives 34-322)
Einstein began to play the violin at age six; by the
mid-1940s he had given it up and played around
only on the piano. According to Barbara Wolff of the
Einstein Archives, Einstein had at least ten different
violins between 1920 and 1950. He allegedly called
at least one of his violins “Lina” and willed his last
one to his grandson, Bernhard, who gave it to his
son Paul. See Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, 14;
Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 251.
Stick to the Mozart sonatas. Your papa, too, learned
to know music well through them.
To son Hans Albert, January 8, 1917. Einstein had “fallen in
love with the Mozart sonatas” at age thirteen. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 287, n. 2
 
236 The Quotations
The differences between Japanese music and our
own are truly fundamental. Whereas in our European
music, chords and architectural arrangement
are essential and are a given, they are absent in Japanese
music. Both, however, have the same thirteen
notes that make up an octave. To me, Japanese music
is a painting of emotions that has a surprising and
immediate effect. . . . I have the impression that it is
all about giving a stylized presentation of the emotions
found in the human voice, as well as the sounds
of nature that stir the human soul, such as birdsong
and the rumble of the ocean. This sensation is given
force because percussion instruments, which are not
limited by pitch and are especially well suited for
rhythmic characterization, play a large role. . . . To
my mind, the greatest obstacle to the acceptance of
Japanese music as a great art form is its lack of formal
arrangement and architectural structure.
From “My Impressions of Japan,” Kaizo 5, no. 1 (January
1923), 339. Einstein Archives 36-477.1
Unfortunately I don’t feel I am in a position, on the
strength of either my sexual or my musical abilities,
to accept your kind invitation.
To Kurt Singer, August 16, 1926, in declining an invitation
to participate in a musical event at the First International
Congress for Sexual Research. Einstein was playing with
words, as he had been invited to play one of the violin
parts of the Brahms String Sextet, no. 1 B-dur, op. 18. Einstein
Archives 44-905
 
On Music 237
Music does not influence research work, but both are
nourished by the same sort of longing, and they
complement each other in the satisfaction they offer.
To Paul Plaut, October 23, 1928. Quoted in Dukas and
Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 78. Einstein Archives
28-065
As to Schubert, I have only this to say: play the
music, love—and keep your mouth shut!
Reply to yet another question on composers, November 10,
1928. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the
Human Side, 75
This is what I have to say about Bach’s life and work:
listen, play, love, revere—and keep your mouth
shut.
Reply to a questionnaire on Bach for the magazine Reclams
Universum, 1928. Quoted in Einstein: A Portrait, 74, and
Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 75.
Einstein Archives 28-058.1
If I were not a physicist, I would probably be a musician.
I often think in music. I live my daydreams in
music. I see my life in terms of music. . . . I get most
joy in life out of my violin.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 436
In Europe, music has come too far away from
popular art and popular feeling and has become
 
238 The Quotations
something like a secret art with conventions and traditions
of its own.
From a conversation with Indian mystic, poet, and musician
Rabindranath Tagore on August 19, 1930, in Berlin,
discussing the possibility of self-expression in Eastern and
Western music. In Asia 31 (March 1931), 140–142
It requires a very high standard of art to realize fully
a great idea in original music so that one can make
variations upon it. [In the West], the variations are
often prescribed.
Ibid.
The difficulty is that really good music, whether of
the East or of the West, cannot be analyzed.
Ibid.
*The unemployment situation of musicians in general
is appalling, not so much in destitute nations as
in those with a meager musical culture where children
no longer learn to play instruments.
To A. Woehr, April 5, 1933. Einstein Archives 52-305
*Don’t read any newspapers, find a few like-minded
people and read the wonderful writers of the past,
Kant, Goethe, Lessing, and the classics of other countries,
and take joy in the wonderful natural environ-
 
On Music 239
ment you can find in Munich. . . . Seek the companionship
of a few animals.
Ibid. Woehr was an unemployed musician and asked Einstein
for advice on how to lead his life.
Mozart’s music is so pure and beautiful that I see it
as a refl ection of the inner beauty of the universe.
As recalled by Peter Bucky, The Private Albert Einstein (1933)
I took violin lessons from age 6 to 14, but had no
luck with my teachers, for whom music did not
transcend mechanical practicing. I really began to
learn only when I was about 13 years old, mainly
after I had fallen in love with Mozart’s sonatas.
In draft of letter to Philipp Frank, 1940. Einstein Archives
71-191
I feel uncomfortable listening to Beethoven. I think
he is too personal, almost naked. Give me Bach,
rather, and then more Bach.
From an interview with Lili Foldes, The Etude, January 1947
My knowledge of modern music is very restricted.
But in one respect I feel certain: true art is characterized
by an unstoppable urge in the creative artist.
From a tribute to Ernst Bloch, November 15, 1950. Quoted
in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 77.
Einstein Archives 34-332
 
240 The Quotations
I am done fiddling. With the passage of years, it has
become more and more unbearable for me to listen
to my own playing.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, January 6, 1951. Quoted in
Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 554. Einstein Archives
32-400
The piano is much more suited to improvisation
[than the violin], also for playing alone, and I play
the piano every day. Besides, it would be much too
physically strenuous for me to play the violin now.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” March
24, 1954
Today I heard Mozart’s Jupiter Symphony on the
radio. It is the best piece that Mozart wrote. Of Mozart’s
operas, Figaro and The Abduction [from the Seraglio]
are outstanding. I don’t like The Magic Flute
so much. Of the modern ones, only Mussorgsky’s
Boris Godunov is good.
Ibid., March 10, 1955
Mozart wrote such nonsense here!
While struggling to play a piece by Mozart. Quoted by
Margot Einstein in an interview with Jamie Sayen for Einstein
in America, 139
First I improvise, and if that doesn’t help, I seek solace
in Mozart. But when I am improvising and it
 
On Music 241
appears that something may come of it, I require
the clear constructions of Bach in order to follow
through.
Explaining how he relaxes after work playing his violin in
his Berlin kitchen, a room with superior acoustics. Recalled
by Konrad Wachsmann in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein,
251. Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 132
 
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, and
World Government
 
 
Einstein was a pacifi st from his youth until 1933,
when Hitler forced his hand on the issue. From 1933
to 1945, he saw some need for military action under
certain circumstances; in particular, he felt that military
strength among “the nations that have stayed
normal” was vital against the German aggressor
(Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 676). In general, however,
he believed that a “supranational” world government
for the control of weapons was necessary to
preserve civilization and individual freedoms. From
1945 until his death in 1955, he spoke out in favor of
world government as a moral imperative.
*An affinity for the political structure of Germany
would be unnatural for me as a pacifi st.
To Fritz Haber, March 9, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 87
He who cherishes the values of culture cannot fail to
be a pacifi st.
From Einstein’s contribution to Die Friedensbewegung, ed.
Kurt Lenz and Walter Fabian (1922). Quoted in Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 55
Most of those representing the field of history have
certainly done little to foster the cause of pacifi sm.
Many of its representatives . . . have publicly made
astounding and strongly chauvinistic and military
pronouncements. . . . The situation is quite different
in the natural sciences.
From Die Friedensbewegung, ibid.
 
246 The Quotations
Because of the universal character of their subject
matter and their need for internationally organized
cooperation, [scientists] are inclined toward international
understanding and therefore favor pacifi st
goals.
Ibid.
Technology resulting from the sciences has internationally
chained together economies and this has
caused all wars to become a matter of international
importance. When this situation has entered the consciousness
of mankind, after sufficient turmoil, then
men will also find the energy and goodwill to create
organizations that have the power to end wars.
Ibid.
I wish (1) that next year will bring the broadest
possible international agreements on disarmament
on land and at sea; (2) that a solution will be found
for the international war debts that allows the European
states to pay their obligations without having
to pawn their property abroad; (3) that an honest
arrangement can be reached with the Soviet
Union that frees this land from external pressures
while allowing its internal development to proceed
unhindered.
From a statement for the December 31, 1928, Chicago Daily
News, after being asked by reporter Edgar Mowrer what
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 247
his wishes were for the New Year. (Courtesy of Uriel Gorney
and Mishael Zedek.) Einstein Archives 47-670
No person has the right to call himself a Christian or
Jew so long as he is prepared to engage in systematic
murder at the command of an authority, or
allow himself to be used in any way in the service of
war or the preparation for it.
From a statement for “Livre d’or de la paix,” 1928. Quoted
in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace. Einstein Archives
28-054
I would absolutely refuse any direct or indirect war
service and would try to persuade my friends to
do the same, regardless of the reasons for the cause
of a war.
Written February 23, 1929, for publication in Die Wahrheit
(Prague, 1929). Also in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on
Peace. Einstein Archives 48-684
My pacifism is an instinctive feeling, a feeling that
possesses me because the murder of people is disgusting.
My attitude is not derived from any intellectual
theory but is based on my deepest antipathy
to every kind of cruelty and hatred.
To Paul Hutchinson, editor of Christian Century, July 1929.
An interview was published in Christian Century, August 28,
1929. Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 98
I have made no secret, either privately or publicly, of
any sense of outrage over officially enforced military
 
248 The Quotations
and war service. I regard it as a duty of conscience to
fi ght against such barbarous enslavement of the individual
with every means available.
From a statement to the Danish newspaper Politiken, August
5, 1930. Reprinted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on
Peace, 129. Einstein Archives 48-036
*When those who are bound together by pacifi st
ideals hold a meeting they are always consorting
with their own kind only. They are like sheep huddled
together while the wolves wait outside. . . . The
sheep’s voice does not get beyond this circle and
therefore is ineffective.
From the “Two Percent” speech for the New History Society,
an offshoot of the pacifi st Baha’i religion, in New York,
December 14, 1930. From notes taken by Rosika Schwimmer.
See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 240.
Einstein Archives 48-479
*Under our present system of military duty everyone
is compelled to commit a crime—the crime of
killing people for his country. The aim of all pacifi sts
must be to convince others of the immorality of war
and rid the world of the shameful slavery of military
service.
Ibid.
*Even if only two percent of those supposed to
perform military service should declare themselves
war resisters and assert, “We are not going to fi ght.
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 249
We need other methods of settling international disputes,”
the governments would be powerless—they
could not put such masses into jail.
Ibid., 241
*The man who enjoys marching in line and file to
the strains of music falls below my contempt. This
heroism on command, this senseless violence, this
accursed bombast of patriotism—how intensely I
despise them! War is low and despicable, and I had
rather be smitten to shreds than participate in such
doings.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930), 193–
194. Variously translated elsewhere, including in earlier
editions of this book. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 229
I believe serious progress [in the abolition of war]
can be achieved only when men become organized
on an international scale and refuse, as a body, to
enter military or war service.
From a statement in Jugendtribüne, April 17, 1931. Einstein
Archives 47-165
*Few of us still cling to the notion that acts of violence
in the shape of wars are either advantageous
or worthy of humanity as a method of solving international
problems. But we are not consistent enough
to make vigorous efforts on behalf of the measures
 
250 The Quotations
which might prevent war, that savage and unworthy
relic of the age of barbarism.
From “America and the Disarmament Conference of 1932,”
June 1931. May have been delivered at Whittier College in
California on January 18, 1932, according to Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 658. Reprinted in Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 248. Einstein Archives
28-152
There are two ways of resisting war: the legal way
and the revolutionary way. The legal way involves
the offer of alternative service not as a privilege for
a few but as a right for all. The revolutionary view
involves an uncompromising resistance, with a view
to breaking the power of militarism in time of peace
or the resources of the state in time of war.
From a statement recorded by Fenner Brockway for The
New World, July 1931, after meeting with Einstein in May
1931. Einstein Archives 47-742
I appeal to all men and women, whether they be
eminent or humble, to declare that they will refuse
to give any further assistance to war or the preparation
of war.
From a statement to the War Resisters International, Lyon,
France, August 1931. Quoted in Frank, Einstein: His Life and
Times, 158; also quoted in the New York Times, August 2,
1931
*Anybody who really wants to abolish war must resolutely
declare himself in favor of his own country’s
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 251
resigning a portion of its sovereignty in favor of international
institutions: he must be ready to make
his own country amenable, in case of a dispute, to
the award of an international court. He must . . . support
disarmament all round.
Ibid. Einstein uses almost the same words in a letter to
Sigmund Freud of July 30, 1932 (Einstein Archives 32-543,
545, 546). He returns to this theme of world government
after World War II.
*The State exists for man, not man for the State. . . .
I believe that the most important mission of the State
is to protect the individual and make it possible for
him to develop into a creative personality. The State
should be our servant; we should not be slaves of
the State. The State violates this precept when it
forces us to perform military service.
From “The Road to Peace,” published in the New York
Times Magazine, November 22, 1931. Reprinted in Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 253. (In previous editions
of The Quotable Einstein, I had given a slightly different
version and a wrong reference used in Ideas and Opinions.)
Einstein Archives 28-175
*To refuse on moral grounds to perform military
service may expose one to severe persecution; is this
persecution any less shameful for society than the
persecution to which the religious martyrs were
subjected in earlier centuries?
Ibid., 255
 
252 The Quotations
I am not only a pacifist, but a militant pacifist. I am
willing to fight for peace. . . . Is it not better for a
man to die for a cause in which he believes, such as
peace, than to suffer for a cause in which he does not
believe, such as war?
From an interview with G. S. Viereck in 1931, published in
a booklet with other texts, The Fight against War, ed. Alfred
Lief (New York: John Day, 1933). As quoted in Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 125–126
Peace cannot be kept by force. It can only be achieved
by understanding. You cannot subjugate a nation
forcibly unless you wipe out every man, woman,
and child. Unless you wish to use such drastic measures,
you must find a way of settling your disputes
without resort to arms.
From “Notes on Pacifi sm,” in Cosmic Religion (1931), 67.
Probably a paraphrase. Original source unknown.
I am the same ardent pacifist I was before. But I believe
that the tool of refusing military service can be
advocated again in Europe only when the military
threat from aggressive dictatorships toward democratic
countries has ceased to exist.
To Rabbi Philip Bernstein, April 5, 1934. In Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 250. Einstein Archives 49-276
Only if we succeed in abolishing compulsory military
service altogether will it be possible to educate
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 253
the youth in the spirit of reconciliation, joy in life,
and love toward all living creatures.
From “Three Letters to Friends of Peace,” published in
Mein Weltbild (1934); reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 109
*To arm is to give one’s voice and make one’s preparations,
not for peace but for war. Therefore people
will not disarm step by step; they will disarm at one
blow or not at all.
From “The Question of Disarmament,” published in ibid.;
translated slightly differently in Ideas and Opinions, 102–103.
Taken from Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 22.
Einstein Archives 28-180
*I stand firmly by the principle that a real solution of
the problem of pacifism can be achieved only by the
organization of a super-national court of arbitration,
which, differing from the present League of Nations
in Geneva, would have at its disposal the means of
enforcing its decisions. In short, an international
court of justice with a permanent military establishment—or
better, police force.
From “A Re-examination of Pacifi sm,” Polity 3, no. 1 (January
1935), 4–5. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 284–286. Einstein Archives 28-296
Pacifism defeats itself under certain conditions, as it
would in Germany today. . . . We must work with the
people to create a public sentiment that will outlaw
 
254 The Quotations
war: (1) create the idea of supersovereignty; . . .
(2) face the economic causes of war.
From an interview with Robert M. Bartlett, Survey Graphic
24 (August 1935), 384, 413. Reprinted in Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 260
I am convinced that an international political organization
is not only possible but is unconditionally
necessary if the situation on our planet should eventually
become unbearable.
From a draft manuscript, ca. 1940. See Kaller’s autographs
catalog, “Jewish Visionaries,” 35
In the twenties, when no dictatorships existed, I advocated
that refusing to go to war would make war
improper. But as soon as coercive conditions appeared
in certain nations, I felt that it would weaken
the less aggressive nations vis-à-vis the more aggressive
ones.
From an interview, New York Times, December 30, 1941.
Einstein Archives 29-096
There is no other salvation for civilization and even
for the human race than in the creation of a world
government, with the security of nations founded
upon law. As long as there are sovereign states with
their separate armaments and armament secrets,
new world wars cannot be avoided.
From a press interview, New York Times, September 15, 1945
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 255
*At the present high level of industrialization and
economic interdependence, it is unthinkable that we
can achieve peace without a genuine supranational
organization to govern international relations. If
war is to be avoided, anything less than such an
over-all solution strikes me as illusory.
To J. Robert Oppenheimer, September 29, 1945. Einstein Archives
57-294
*The secret of the bomb should be committed to a
world government, and the United States should
immediately announce its readiness to do so. Such a
world government should be established by the
United States, the Soviet Union and Great Britain,
the only three powers which possess great military
strength. The three of them should commit to this
world government all of their military resources.
The fact that there are only three nations with great
military power should make it easier, rather than
harder, to establish a world government.
To Raymond Swing, Atlantic Monthly 176, no. 5 (November
1945), 43–45
Everything that is done in international affairs must
be done from the following viewpoint: Will it help
or hinder the establishment of world government?
From the text of a broadcast interview with P. A. Schilpp
and F. Parmelee, May 29, 1946. See also Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 382. Einstein Archives 29-105
 
256 The Quotations
A world government must be created which is able
to solve conflicts between nations by judicial decision.
. . . This government must be based on a clearcut
constitution that is approved by the governments
and the nations, and which has the sole disposition
of offensive weapons.
From a broadcast for a rally of Students for Federal World
Government, Chicago, May 29, 1946. See New York Times,
May 30, 1946. Quoted in Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 232. Einstein
Archives 28-694
I advocate world government because I am convinced
that there is no other possible way of eliminating
the most terrible danger in which man has
ever found himself. The objective of avoiding total
destruction must have priority over any other
objective.
From “A Reply to the Soviet Scientists,” Bulletin of Atomic
Scientists, February 1948. Also in Ideas and Opinions, 140–
146. Einstein Archives 28-795
There is only one path to peace and security: the
path of a supranational organization. One-sided armament
on a national basis only heightens the general
uncertainty and confusion without being an effective
protection.
From an address at Carnegie Hall in New York on receiving
the One World Award, April 27, 1948. Published in Out
of My Later Years; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 147
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 257
If the idea of world government is not realistic, then
there is only one realistic view of our future: wholesale
destruction of man by man.
From a comment about the fi lm Where Will You Hide? May
1948. Einstein Archives 28-817
Mankind can be saved only if a supranational system,
based on law, is created to eliminate the methods
of brute force.
From a statement in Impact 1 (1950), 104. Einstein Archives
28-882
It is my belief that the problem of bringing peace to
the world on a supranational basis will be solved
only by employing Gandhi’s method on a larger
scale.
To Gerhard Nellhaus, March 20, 1951. Einstein Archives
60-684
The conscientious objector is a revolutionary. In deciding
to disobey the law he sacrifices his personal
interests to the most important cause of working for
the betterment of society.
Ibid.
I can identify my views almost completely with
those of Gandhi. But I would (individually and collectively)
resist with violence any attempt to kill or
 
258 The Quotations
to take away from my people or me the basic means
of subsistence.
To A. Morrisett, March 21, 1952. Einstein Archives
60-595
The goal of pacifism is possible only through a supranational
organization. To stand unconditionally
for this cause is . . . the criterion of true pacifi sm.
Ibid.
I believe that the killing of human beings in a war is
no better than common murder.
To the editor of the Japanese magazine Kaizo, September 20,
1952. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 488.
Einstein Archives 60-039
My participation in the production of the atomic
bomb consisted of one single act: I signed a letter to
President Roosevelt in which I emphasized the necessity
of conducting large-scale experimentation
with regard to the feasibility of producing an atom
bomb. . . . I felt impelled to take the step because it
seemed probable that the Germans might be working
on the same problem with every prospect of success.
I had no alternative to act as I did, although I
have always been a convinced pacifi st.
Ibid.
 
On Pacifi sm, Disarmament, Government 259
The more a country makes military weapons, the
more insecure it becomes: if you have weapons, you
become a target for attack.
From an interview with A. Aram, January 3, 1953. Einstein
Archives 59-109
In my letter to Kaizo, I did not say that I was an absolute
pacifi st, but rather that I had always been a convinced
pacifi st. While I am a convinced pacifist, there
are circumstances in which I believe the use of force
is appropriate—namely, in the face of an enemy
unconditionally bent on destroying me and my
people.
To Japanese pacifi st Seiei Shinohara, February 22, 1953. Shinohara,
who felt Gandhi would not have written the letter
to Roosevelt if he were in Einstein’s position, had not accepted
Einstein’s remarks in Kaizo as valid, prompting the
above reply. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
490. Einstein Archives 61-295
I am a dedicated but not an absolute pacifi st; this
means that I am opposed to the use of force under
any circumstances except when confronted by an
enemy who pursues the destruction of life as an end
in itself.
To Seiei Shinohara, June 23, 1953. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 491. Einstein Archives 61-297
In all cases where a reasonable solution of diffi culties
is possible, I favor honest cooperation and, if this is
 
260 The Quotations
not possible under prevailing circumstances, Gandhi’s
method of peaceful resistance to evil.
To John Moore, November 9, 1953. Quoted in Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 596. Einstein Archives 60-584
I have always been a pacifist, i.e., I have declined to
recognize brute force as a means for the solution
of international conflicts. Nevertheless, it is, in my
opinion, not reasonable to cling to that principle unconditionally.
An exception has necessarily to be
made if a hostile power threatens wholesale destruction
of one’s own group.
To H. Herbert Fox, May 18, 1954. Einstein Archives 59-727
 
On Peace, War, the Bomb,
and the Military
 
 
*The struggle raging today will likely produce no
victor. . . . Therefore, it seems not only ethically fitting,
but rather bitterly necessary that intellectuals of
all nations marshal their influence such that the terms
of peace shall not become the cause of future wars.
From “Manifesto to the Europeans,” prepared in midOctober
1914 by Georg Nicolai, Wilhelm Foerster, and Einstein
to counter an earlier manifesto upholding German
justifi cation for actions in the early phases of World War I.
CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 8
Even the scholars in various lands have been acting
as if their brains had been amputated.
To Romain Rolland, March 22, 1915, on the outbreak of
World War I. Rolland was the most prominent pacifi st of
his time. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 65
The psychological roots of war are, in my opinion,
biologically rooted in the aggressive nature of the
male creature. . . . Some animals—the bull and the
rooster—surpass us in this regard.
From “My Opinion on the War,” for the Goethebund of
Berlin, October–November 1915. CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 20.
Einstein repeated this opinion in an interview with anthropologist
Ashley Montagu thirty-one years later, in June
1946, claiming that a child’s naughtiness and a parent’s
spanking—“domestic violence”—were innately reactive,
instinctive acts and a microcosmic example of international
violence and aggression. Einstein was essentially agreeing
with Sigmund Freud’s conclusions, but Montagu disagreed
and persuaded Einstein that the doctrine of man’s innate
 
264 The Quotations
depravity was unsound. See Montagu’s article, “Conversations
with Einstein,” in Science Digest, July 1985. Einstein
Archives 29-002
*The internationalism that existed before the war,
before 1914, the internationalism of culture, the cosmopolitanism
of commerce and industry, the broad
tolerance of ideas—this internationalism was essentially
right. There will be no peace on earth, the
wounds inflicted by the war will not heal, until this
internationalism is restored.
From an interview in the New York Evening Post, March 26,
1921. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 89
*In spite of so many hopes and illusions, war will
always be possible. The world does not seem to fear
even the most extreme and catastrophic inhumanity
and murderousness of war.
From an interview with Aldo Sorani in Il Messagero, October
26, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Appendix G
*I think that the greatest contribution to peace could
be made by the press, [which] too often helps the
war or helps to stir up political unrest. If the press in
all countries were united in a plan of peace, a decisive
step would be taken toward the achievement of
our ideal of harmony, brotherhood, and universal
sharing of goods in the world.
Ibid.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 265
*The people in every country will insist that their
own nation is the victim of aggression and will do
so in perfectly good faith. . . . You cannot educate a
nation for war and, at the same time, make its people
believe that war is a shameful crime.
To Jacques Hadamard, September 24, 1929. Einstein Archives
12-025
*I admit that the country which decides not to defend
itself assumes a great risk. However, this risk is
accepted by society as a whole, and in the interest of
human progress. Real progress has never been possible
without sacrifices. . . . As long as nations systematically
continue to prepare for war, fear, distrust
and selfi sh ambitions will lead to war again.
Ibid.
*To wage war means both to kill the innocent and
to allow oneself to be innocently killed. . . . How
can any decent and self-respecting person participate
in such a tragic affair? Would you perjure
yourself if your government asked you to do so?
Certainly not. How much worse, then, to slaughter
innocent men?
Ibid.
As long as armies exist, any serious conflict will
lead to war. A pacifism that does not actively fi ght
 
266 The Quotations
against the armament of nations is and must remain
impotent.
From “Active Pacifi sm,” August 8, 1931, for a peace demonstration
at Dixmuide, a Belgian battleground in World
War I. Published in Mein Weltbild (1934), 55; reprinted in
Ideas and Opinions, 111
May the conscience and the common sense of the
people be awakened, so that we may reach a new
stage in the life of nations, where people will look
back on war as an incomprehensible aberration of
their forefathers!
Ibid.
War is not a parlor game in which the players obediently
stick to the rules. Where life and death are at
stake, rules and obligations go by the board. Only
the absolute repudiation of all war can be of any use
here.
From an address to university students in California, February
27, 1932. Source misquoted in Ideas and Opinions, 93.
Published in the New York Times, February 28, 1932. Einstein
Archives 28-187
*Moral disarmament, like the problem of peace as a
whole, is made difficult because men in power never
want to surrender any part of their country’s sovereignty,
which is exactly what they must do if war is
to be abolished.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 267
From a press conference at the Geneva Disarmament Conference,
May 23, 1932. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 257, who took this version from the German edition
of Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, or 168–169 of
the English edition. Nathan and Norden note that Einstein
revised another version of the transcript of the conference,
prepared by War Resisters International, because he felt he
had been misunderstood. They state that “Einstein’s own
version” (Einstein Archives 72-559) was used as the basis
for their English translation.
*I am absolutely convinced that we should use every
possible means to strengthen the war resistance
movement. Its moral significance cannot be overestimated.
. . . [It] inspires individual courage, challenges
the conscience of men, and undermines the
authority of the military system.
Ibid.
*This is not a comedy. This is a tragedy . . . despite
the cap and bells and buffoonery. No one has
any right to treat this tragedy lightly or to laugh
when one should cry. We should be standing on
rooftops, all of us, and denouncing this conference
as a travesty!
From an interview by Konrad Bercovici before the press
conference referred to above. Published in Pictorial Review
the following year, February 1933; quoted in Clark, Einstein,
372. Clark states that “no one would claim that this is
necessarily an accurate . . . verbatim account of what Einstein
said. But from all available evidence it would seem to
refl ect his excited . . . attitude.”
 
268 The Quotations
We must . . . dedicate our lives to drying up the
source of war: ammunition factories.
Ibid., 373
This is the problem: Is there any way of delivering
mankind from the menace of war? It is common
knowledge that with the advance of modern science,
this issue has come to mean a matter of life
and death for civilization as we know it; nevertheless,
for all the zeal displayed, every attempt at its
solution has ended in a lamentable breakdown.
To Sigmund Freud, July 30, 1932. Published, along with
Freud’s reply, as Why War? by the League of Nations. Also
quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 188. Einstein
Archives 32-543
Anyone who really wants to abolish war must resolutely
declare himself in favor of his own country’s
resigning a portion of its sovereignty in favor of international
institutions.
From “America and the Disarmament Conference of 1932.”
Published in Mein Weltbild, 63; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions,
101
Compulsory military service, as a hotbed of unhealthy
nationalism, must be abolished; most important,
conscientious objectors must be protected
on an international basis.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 269
From “The Disarmament Conference of 1932,” in Ideas and
Opinions, 98. A different version appears in The Nation,
Vol. 133, 300
Compulsory military service seems to me the most
disgraceful symptom of the deficiency in personal
dignity from which civilized mankind is suffering
today.
From “Society and Personality,” 1932. Published in Mein
Weltbild (1934); reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 15
The powerful industrial groups concerned with the
manufacture of arms are doing their best in all countries
to prevent the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, and rulers can achieve this great end
only if they are sure of the vigorous support of the
majority of their people. In these days of democratic
government, the fate of nations hangs on the people
themselves; each individual must always bear that
in mind.
From “Peace,” 1932. Published in Mein Weltbild (1934); reprinted
in Ideas and Opinions, 106
*Without doubt the present economic difficulties will
bring forth some legislation to the effect that an adjustment
between supply and demand of labor as
well as between production and consumption will always
be brought about through government control.
But these problems too must be solved by free men.
Ibid.
 
270 The Quotations
It is unworthy of a great nation to stand idly by
while small countries of great culture are being destroyed
with a cynical contempt for justice.
From a message to a peace meeting at Madison Square
Garden, April 5, 1938. Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein
on Peace, 279. Einstein Archives 28-424
*Some recent work by E. Fermi and L. Szilard, which
has been communicated to me in manuscript, leads
me to expect that the element uranium may be
turned into a new and important source of energy in
the immediate future. Certain aspects of the situation
seem to call for watchfulness and, if necessary,
quick action on the part of the Administration.
The fi rst paragraph of Einstein’s famous letter to President
Roosevelt concerning his fear that Germany might build a
bomb, August 2, 1939. Widely available on the Internet.
Einstein was not privy to any further developments and,
lacking security clearance, did not participate in the Manhattan
Project that built the American bomb. He did consult
on other, more minor, military matters. Einstein Archives
33-088
Organized power can be opposed only by organized
power. Much as I regret this, there is no other way.
To R. Fowlkes, a pacifi st student, July 14, 1941. Einstein Archives
55-100
*The terms of secrecy under which Dr. Szilard is
working at present do not permit him to give me
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 271
information about his work; however, I understand
that he now is greatly concerned about the lack of
adequate contact between scientists who are doing
this work and those members of your Cabinet who
are responsible for formulating policy. In the circumstances,
I consider it my duty to give Dr. Szilard
this introduction and I wish to express the hope that
you will be able to give his presentation of the case
your personal attention.
To President Roosevelt, March 25, 1945, after Einstein
became concerned about the control of atomic energy
and the political policy implications. Roosevelt died
on April 12 and never saw the letter. Einstein Archives
33-109
I have done no work on [the atomic bomb], no work
at all. I am interested in the bomb the same as any
other person, perhaps a little bit more interested.
From an interview with Richard J. Lewis, New York Times,
August 12, 1945
*Dear Albert! My scientific work has no more than a
very indirect connection to the atomic bomb.
From a letter of assurance to his son Hans Albert, September
2, 1945. Translated in Neffe, Einstein, 388. Einstein Archives
75-790
As long as nations demand unrestricted sovereignty
we shall undoubtedly be faced with still bigger
 
272 The Quotations
wars, fought with bigger and technologically more
advanced weapons.
To Robert Hutchins, September 10, 1945. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 337. Einstein Archives 56-894
The release of atomic energy has not created a new
problem. It has merely made more urgent the necessary
solving of an existing one. One could say it has
affected us quantitatively, not qualitatively.
From “Einstein on the Atomic Bomb,” part 1, as told to Raymond
Swing, Atlantic Monthly 176, no. 5 (November 1945),
43–45. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 373–378
I do not believe that civilization will be wiped out in
a war fought with the atomic bomb. Perhaps twothirds
of the people on Earth would be killed, but
enough men capable of thinking, and enough books,
would be left to start out again, and civilization
would be restored.
Ibid.
The secret of the bomb should be committed to a
world government. . . . Do I fear the tyranny of a
world government? Of course I do. But I fear still
more the coming of another war or wars. Any government
is certain to be evil to some extent. But a
world government is preferable to the far greater
evil of wars.
Ibid.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 273
I do not consider myself the father of the release of
atomic energy. My part in it was quite indirect. I did
not, in fact, foresee that it would be released in my
lifetime. I believed only that it was theoretically possible.
It became practical only through the accidental
discovery of a chain reaction, and this was not
something I could have predicted.
Ibid.
The war is won, but the peace is not. The great powers,
united in fighting, are now divided over the
peace settlements.
From an address at the fi fth Nobel anniversary dinner in
New York, December 10, 1945. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 382. Einstein Archives 28-722
*Many persons have inquired concerning a recent
message of mine that “a new type of thinking is essential
if mankind is to survive and move to higher
levels.” . . . Past thinking and methods did not prevent
world wars. Future thinking must prevent wars.
Ibid., 383. This is one of the most queried Einstein
quotations.
*In previous ages a nation’s life and culture could be
protected to some extent by the growth of armies in
national competition. Today we must abandon competition
and secure cooperation.
Ibid.
 
274 The Quotations
Rifl e bullets kill men, but atomic bombs kill cities.
A tank is a defense against a bullet but there is no
defense in science against the weapon which can
destroy civilization. . . . Our defense is in law and
order.
Ibid., 384
The unleashed power of the atom bomb has changed
everything except our modes of thinking, and thus
we drift toward unparalleled catastrophes.
From a letter for the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists,
May 23, 1946. Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein
on Peace, 376. Einstein Archives 88-539
Science has brought forth this danger, but the real
problem is in the minds and hearts of men. We will
not change the hearts of other men by mechanisms,
but by changing our hearts and speaking bravely. . . .
When we are clear in heart and mind—only then
shall we find courage to surmount the fear which
haunts the world.
On nuclear weapons. From interview with Michael Amrine,
“The Real Problem Is in the Hearts of Men,” New York
Times Magazine, June 23, 1946. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 387–388
Non-cooperation in military matters should be an
essential moral principle for all true scientists . . .
who are engaged in basic research.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 275
In answer to a question posed by the Overseas News
Agency, January 20, 1947. Quoted in Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 401. Einstein Archives 28-733
*Through the release of atomic energy, our generation
has brought into the world the most revolutionary
force since man’s discovery of fi re.
In a letter of support for the Emergency Committee of
Atomic Scientists, January 22, 1947. Many such letters were
sent under various dates. Einstein Archives 40-010
*We scientists recognize our inescapable responsibility
to carry to our fellow citizens an understanding
of the simple facts of atomic energy and its implications
for society. In this lies our only security
and our only hope.
Ibid.
Had I known that the Germans would not succeed
in producing an atomic bomb, I never would have
lifted a fi nger.
To Newsweek magazine, March 10, 1947, in regard to sending
the famous letter to President Roosevelt about the
new possibility of constructing atom bombs. Einstein allegedly
maintained that the development of nuclear energy
would have proceeded much the same even without his
intervention.
Through the release of atomic energy, our gener ation
has brought into the world the most revolutionary
force since prehistoric man’s discovery of fire.
 
276 The Quotations
In a letter of support for the Emergency Committee of
Atomic Scientists, March 22, 1947. Einstein Archives 70-918
*[These military] tendencies . . . are something new
for America. They arose when, under the infl uence
of the two World Wars and the consequent concentration
of all forces on a military goal, a predominantly
military mentality developed, which with
the almost sudden victory became even more accentuated.
The characteristic feature of this mentality is
that people place the importance of what Bertrand
Russell so tellingly terms “naked power” far above
all other factors which affect the relations between
peoples.
From “The Military Mentality,” American Scholar 16, no. 3
(Summer 1947), 353–354. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 477–479
It is characteristic of the military mentality that nonhuman
factors (atom bombs, strategic bases, weapons
of all sorts, the possession of raw materials,
etc.) are held essential, while the human being, his
desires and thoughts—in short, the psychological
factors—are considered unimportant and secondary.
. . . The individual is degraded . . . to “human
materiel.”
Ibid.
The bombing of civilian centers was initiated by
the Germans and adopted by the Japanese. To it, the
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 277
Allies responded in kind—as it turned out, with
greater effectiveness—and they were morally justi-
fi ed in doing so.
From “Einstein on the Atomic Bomb,” part 2, an interview
recorded by Raymond Swing, Atlantic Monthly, November
1947
Deterrence should be the only purpose of the stockpile
of bombs. . . . To keep a stockpile of atomic
bombs without promising not to initiate their use is
to exploit possession of the bombs for political
ends. . . . [Otherwise] atomic warfare will be hard to
avoid.
Ibid.
The strength of the communist system of the East is
that it has some of the character of a religion and inspires
the emotions of a religion. Unless the force of
peace, based on law, gathers behind it the force and
zeal of religion, it can hardly hope to succeed. . . .
There must be added that deep power of emotion
that is a basic ingredient of religion.
Ibid.
It should not be forgotten that the atomic bomb was
made in this country as a preventive measure; it was to
head off its use by the Germans if they discovered it.
Ibid.
 
278 The Quotations
I am not saying the U.S. should not manufacture
and stockpile the bomb, for I believe that it must do
so; it must be able to deter another nation from making
an atomic attack.
Ibid.
Since I do not foresee that atomic energy is to be a
great boon for a long time, I have to say that for the
present it is a menace. Perhaps it is good that it is
so. It may intimidate the human race into bringing
order into its international affairs, which, without
the pressure of fear, it would not do.
The fi nal words in ibid.
As long as there is man, there will be war.
To Philippe Halsman, 1947, quoted on p. 35 of Time, December
31, 1999, in its “Person of the Century” coverage of
Einstein. Perhaps originally cited in Halsman’s Sight and
Insight (1972), which I have been unable to fi nd.
All of us who are concerned about peace and the triumph
of reason and justice must be keenly aware
how small an influence reason and honest goodwill
exert upon events in the political fi eld.
From an address at Carnegie Hall in New York on receiving
the One World Award, April 27, 1948. Published in Out
of My Later Years; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 147
Where belief in the omnipotence of physical force
gets the upper hand in political life, this force takes
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 279
on a life of its own and proves stronger than the men
who think to use force as a tool.
Ibid.
The proposed militarization of the nation not only
immediately threatens us with war, it will also slowly
but surely undermine the democratic spirit and the
dignity of the individual in our land.
Ibid.
The victorious war against Nazi Germany and Japan
has led to the unhealthy influence of our military
men and of military attitudes which endangers the
democratic institutions of our country and the peace
of the world.
From a statement for Conference on “Pattern of Survival,”
New York, dated June 1, 1948. In Nathan and Norden, Einstein
on Peace, 486. Bergreen Albert Einstein Collection, Vassar
College, Box M2003-009, Folder 3.31. Einstein Archives
58-582
We scientists, whose tragic destiny it has been to
help make the methods of annihilation ever more
gruesome and more effective, must consider it our
solemn and transcendent duty to do all in our power
to prevent these weapons from being used for the
brutal purpose for which they were invented.
Quoted in the New York Times, August 29, 1948
 
280 The Quotations
*It is true that the advances made in physics have
made possible the application of scientific results
for technical and military purposes involving great
dangers. However, the responsibility lies with those
who make use of the new tools and not those who
contribute to the progress of knowledge: therefore,
with the politicians and not with the scientists.
Answer to a questionnaire from Milton James for the
Cheyney Record, the student publication of Cheyney State
Teachers College, a college for blacks in Pennsylvania, asking
if the scientists who developed the bomb should be
held morally responsible for its destructive outcome, October
7, 1948. Published February 1949. Corrected from my
earlier version. See Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace,
501–502; Jerome and Taylor, Einstein on Race and Racism, 148.
Einstein Archives 58-013 to 58-015
Creation of a United States of Europe is an economic
and political necessity. Whether it would contribute
to the stabilization of international peace is hardly
predictable. I believe yes rather than no.
In answer to the question of whether such an alliance
would solve the problem of war. Ibid. (Corrected from
my earlier version.)
I don’t know [what weapons will be used in the
Third World War]. But I can tell you what they’ll use
in the Fourth—rocks!
From an interview, “Einstein at 70,” with Alfred Werner,
Liberal Judaism 16 (April–May 1949), 12. Einstein Archives
30-1104, p. 9 of typescript
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 281
So long as security is sought through national armament,
no country is likely to renounce any weapon
that seems to promise it victory in the event of war.
In my opinion, security can be attained only by renouncing
all national military defense.
To Jacques Hadamard, December 29, 1949. Einstein Archives
12-064
*I have never done research having any bearing
upon the production of the atomic bomb. My sole
contribution in this field was that in 1905 I established
the relationship between mass and energy, a
truth about the physical world of a very general nature,
where possible connection to the military potential
was completely foreign to my thoughts.
To A. J. Muste, January 23, 1950. Einstein Archives 60-631
If it [the effort to produce a hydrogen bomb] is successful,
radioactive poisoning of the atmosphere
and hence annihilation of any life on Earth will have
been brought within the range of what is technically
possible.
From a contribution to Eleanor Roosevelt’s television
program on the implications of the H-bomb, broadcast
February 12, 1950. Published in Ideas and Opinions,
159–161
Competitive armament is not a way to prevent
war. Every step in this direction brings us nearer to
 
282 The Quotations
catastrophe. . . . I repeat, armament is no protection
against war, but leads inevitably to war.
From a United Nations Radio interview, June 16, 1950, recorded
in the study of Einstein’s home in Princeton. Published
in Ideas and Opinions, 161–163
Striving for peace and preparing for war are incompatible
with each other. . . . Arms must be entrusted
only to an international authority.
Ibid.
The discovery of a nuclear chain reaction need not
bring about the destruction of mankind any more
than the discovery of matches.
From a message for Canadian Education Week, March
1952. Einstein Archives 59-387
*The real ailment [lies] in . . . the belief that we must
in peacetime so organize our whole life and work
that in the event of war we would be sure of victory.
This attitude gives rise to the belief that one’s freedom
and indeed one’s existence are threatened by
powerful enemies.
From “Symptoms of Cultural Decay,” Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists 8, no. 7 (October 1952), 217–218. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 48
The first atomic bomb destroyed more than the city
of Hiroshima. It also exploded our inherited, outdated
political ideas.
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 283
From a co-signed statement quoted in the New York Times,
June 12, 1953
*The Nuremberg Trial of the German war criminals
was tacitly based on the recognition of the principle:
criminal actions cannot be excused if committed on
government orders; conscience supersedes the authority
of the law of the state.
From “Human Rights,” a message to the Chicago Decalogue
Society of Lawyers upon receiving its award for contributions
to human rights. The message had been written
just before December 5, 1953 (Einstein Archives 28-1012),
and was translated and recorded before being played at the
ceremony on February 20, 1954. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 497
*A.E.C.  Atomic Extermination Conspiracy.
Jotted onto a copy of the pamphlet “Stop the Bomb: An Attempt
to the Reason of the American People,” ca. April–
June 1954. Einstein Archives 28-925. The pamphlet was
sent to Einstein in the hope he would sign a petition to
President Eisenhower urging him to discontinue testing
hydrogen bombs in the Pacifi c. Einstein felt such an appeal
was useless and only self-gratifying. See Schweber, “Einstein
and Nuclear Weapons,” in Galison, Holton, and
Schweber, eds., Einstein for the Twenty-fi rst Century, 91. Also
mentioned in Johanna Fantova’s journal, June 14, 1954.
*The only comfort which may be derived from the
development of atomic weapons is the hope that this
weapon may act as a deterrent and give impetus to
a movement to establish supranational safeguards.
 
284 The Quotations
Unfortunately, at the present time, the insanity of
nationalism seems more powerful than ever before.
To Seiei Shinohara, July 7, 1954. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 493. Einstein Archives 61-306
I made one great mistake in my life—when I signed
that letter to President Roosevelt recommending
that atom bombs be made; but there was some justi-
fi cation—the danger that the Germans would make
them!
Written down by Linus Pauling in his diary after speaking
with Einstein, November 16, 1954. Copied directly from the
diary. The longer version quoted in the fi rst two editions of
this book (copied from secondary sources) is not in the
diary. Although Einstein’s letter was a warning about possibilities
and did not actually advocate the building of a
bomb, he realized that it might ultimately lead to one. If
Americans did not speed up their research in this area, Leo
Szilard, who drafted the letter, and Einstein feared that Hitler
might develop a bomb fi rst and use it; that without one,
the United States would not be able to retaliate in kind to
protect itself; and that failure to write to Roosevelt might
lead to a world ruled by a nuclear-armed Hitler. (Diary is
at Valley Library, Oregon State University, Corvallis. Ava
Helen and Linus Pauling Papers)
There was never even the slightest indication of any
potential technological application.
To Jules Isaac, February 28, 1955, refuting the idea that his
special theory of relativity was responsible for atomic fi ssion
and the atom bomb. Atomic fi ssion, accomplished in
December 1938 in Berlin by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann,
was made possible by the discovery of the neutron
 
On Peace, War, and the Bomb 285
by James Chadwick in 1932; fi ssion requires neutrons.
Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 623. Einstein
Archives 59-1055
There lies before us, if we choose, continued progress
in happiness, knowledge, and wisdom. Shall we, instead,
choose death, because we cannot forget our
quarrels? We appeal, as human beings, to human beings:
Remember your humanity and forget the rest.
From the fi rst paragraph of Einstein’s last signed statement,
regarding the development of weapons of mass destruction,
drafted and signed by Bertrand Russell and
signed by nine other scientists; signed by Einstein on April
11, 1955, one week before his death. The document has
come to be known as the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, issued
in London on July 9, 1955, after Einstein’s death. Einstein
Archives 33-211
We invite this Congress, and through it the scientists
of the world and the general public, to subscribe to
the following resolution: “In view of the fact that in
any future world war nuclear weapons will certainly
be employed, and that such weapons threaten
the continued existence of mankind, we urge the
Governments of the world to realize, and to acknowledge
publicly, that their purpose cannot be
furthered by a world war, and we urge them, consequently,
to find peaceful means for the settlement of
all matters of dispute between them.”
Ibid.
 
 
On Politics, Patriotism,
and Government
 
 
Einstein’s politics can best be described by this passage
from Rowe and Schulmann’s Einstein on Politics,
458: “Einstein shunned ideologues, whether on
the left or the right. By the same token, he had the
deepest sympathy for all those who spoke out
against tyranny and in favor of human freedom. Indeed,
for the last twenty-fi ve years of his life he was
an indefatigable advocate of civil liberties and a
staunch defender of those who put their lives in
jeopardy to advance human rights.”
*I have no intention of making a secret of my internationalist
sentiments. How close I feel to a human
being or a human organization depends only on
how I judge their intentions and capabilities. The
state, to which I as a citizen belong, has no place at
all in my emotional life; I consider affiliation with a
state to be a business matter, somewhat akin to one’s
relationship to life insurance.
A passage deleted by the editors from “My Opinion on the
War,” an essay for the Berliner Goethebund, published in
1916. According to Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
73, Einstein “could not resist pointing out that he was
only reiterating Tolstoy’s comparison of patriotism to a
mental disorder.” CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 20
*The impulsive behavior of contemporary man in
political matters is enough to keep one’s faith in determinism
alive.
To Max Born, June 4, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 56
 
290 The Quotations
I am convinced that what the next few years will
bring will be far less difficult than the experiences of
past years.
An unprophetic statement about Germany’s political and
economic situation. Ibid.
When a group of people is possessed with collective
insanity, one should act out against them; but hate
and bitterness cannot consume a great and discerning
people for the long term unless they are troubled
themselves.
To H. A. Lorentz, August 1, 1919, regarding the post–World
War I Manifesto of 93, signed by ninety-three German intellectuals
in defense of Germany. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 80
I don’t believe that humanity as such can change in
essence, but I do believe it is possible and even necessary
to put an end to anarchy in international relations,
even though sacrifice of autonomy will be signifi
cant for individual states.
To Hedwig Born, August 31, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 97
On every cornfield, poisonous weeds can grow
alongside the corn when conditions are right. I believe
the conditions matter more than the soil.
To Jean Perrin, September 27, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 114
*I believe that international reconciliation would be
advanced if young students and artists, in greater
 
On Politics and Patriotism 291
numbers than before, were to study in former enemy
countries. Direct experience most effectively counteracts
those disastrous ideologies which under the
infl uence of the World War have been planted in
many heads.
From “On the Contribution of Intellectuals to International
Reconciliation,” an essay for the German Social and Scientifi
c Society of New York, ca. October 1920. CPAE, Vol. 7,
Doc. 47
*Internationalism as I conceive it implies a rational
relationship between countries, a sane union and
understanding between nations, mutual cooperation,
mutual advancement without interference
with a country’s customs or inner life.
From “On Internationalism,” New York Evening Post,
March 26, 1921. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on
Politics, 89; also Illy, Albert Meets America, 4
*I think the idea of a Bolshevik experiment should
be excluded. Where they have had a Bolshevik experiment,
as in Bavaria, the foolish reactionary ambitions
have again become prevalent.
From an interview with Aldo Sorani in Il Messagero, October
26, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Appendix G
In my opinion it is not right to bring politics into scientifi
c matters, nor should individuals be held responsible
for the government of the country to
which they happen to belong.
 
292 The Quotations
To H. A. Lorentz, August 16, 1923. Quoted in French, Einstein:
A Centenary Volume, 187. Einstein Archives 16-554
*Shudder to view this tragedy of human history
where one murders out of fear that one will be murdered.
It is the best, the most altruistic, who are tortured
and killed because their political influence is
feared—but not only in Russia. . . . [The rulers of
Russia] will lose all sympathy if they cannot show
through a great and courageous act of liberation that
they do not need to rely on bloody terror to lend support
to their political ideals.
On a collection of correspondence from inmates in the
early Soviet gulag and affi davits of political persecution
in the Soviet Union published by the International Committee
of Political Prisoners in 1925. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 412–413. Einstein Archives
28-029
*Of course I am not a politician in the conventional
sense of the word; few scholars are. At the same
time I believe that no one should shirk the political
task . . . of restoring the unity between nations that
has been completely destroyed by the world war
and seeing to it that a better and more genuine understanding
among nations makes it impossible
to repeat the dreadful catastrophe we have lived
through.
From an interview in Neue Zürcher Zeitung, November 20,
1927. Einstein Archives 29-022
 
On Politics and Patriotism 293
It is possible to be both. I look upon myself as a person.
Nationalism is an infantile disease. It is the
measles of mankind.
When asked if he considers himself a German or a Jew.
From interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929. Quoted
in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 38;
reprinted in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 449
*If there is anything that can give a layman in the
sphere of economics the courage to express an opinion
on the nature of the alarming economic diffi culties
of the present day, it is the hopeless confusion of
opinions among the experts. . . . If we could somehow
manage to prevent the purchasing power of
the masses, measured in terms of goods, from sinking
below a certain minimum, stoppages in the industrial
cycle such as we are experiencing today
would be rendered impossible.
From “Thoughts on the World Economic Crisis,” ca. 1930,
published in Mein Weltbild (1934). Einstein Archives 28-120.
See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 414–417.
My political ideal is democracy. Everyone should be
respected as an individual, but no one idolized.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930), 193–
194. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 228
*I am convinced that degeneracy follows every autocratic
system of violence, for violence inevitably
 
294 The Quotations
attracts moral inferiors. Time has proved that illustrious
tyrants are succeeded by scoundrels.
Ibid.
*I would never participate in [an ineffectual conference].
It would be like organizing a conference to
stop volcanoes from erupting or to increase rain in
the Sahara.
To Henri Barbusse, April 20, 1932. Einstein Archives 34-533
*Only in a free society is man able to create the inventions
and cultural values which make life worthwhile
to modern man.
From a speech in the Royal Albert Hall, “Science and Civilization,”
October 3, 1933. Published in 1934 as “Europe’s
Danger–Europe’s Hope.” Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 280. Einstein Archives 28-253
Nationalism is, in my opinion, nothing more
than an idealistic rationalization for militarism and
aggression.
From the second draft of the speech in the Royal Albert
Hall, London, October 3, 1933. Quoted in Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 242. Einstein Archives 28-254
*If, as seems likely, the great-power democracies
henceforth act with neutrality against Hitler’s Germany,
this breeding ground of disease will soon
pose a grave moral and political danger for the rest
 
On Politics and Patriotism 295
of the world, not to speak of the unspeakable misery
meted out to German Jews.
To Rabbi Stephen Wise, November 18, 1933. Einstein Archives
35-134
*No purpose is so high that unworthy methods in
achieving it can be justified in my eyes. Violence
sometimes may have cleared away obstructions
quickly, but it has never proved itself creative.
From “Was Europe a Success?” The Nation 139, no. 3613
(October 3, 1934), 373. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 448
National loyalty is limiting; men must be taught to
think in world terms. Every country will have to
surrender a portion of its sovereignty through international
cooperation. To avoid destruction, aggression
must be sacrifi ced.
From an interview in Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935),
384, 413
Politics is a pendulum whose swings between anarchy
and tyranny are fueled by perennially rejuvenated
illusions.
Aphorism, 1937. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 38. Einstein Archives 28-388
Everything that is really great and inspiring is created
by the individual who can labor in freedom.
 
296 The Quotations
From “Morals and Emotions,” commencement address at
Swarthmore College, June 6, 1938. Einstein Archives 29-083
*Scientists have an obligation to become politically
active in the interest of free scientific research. They
must have the courage . . . to enunciate with clarity
their hard-won political and economic convictions.
To the Lincoln’s Birthday Committee for Democracy and
Intellectual Freedom, February 1939. Cited in Nathan and
Norden, Einstein on Peace, 283
What distinguishes a true republic is not only the
form of its government but also the deeply rooted
feelings of equal justice for all and respect for every
individual.
From a statement issued on Einstein’s sixtieth birthday. Science
89, n.s. (1939), 242
*Excessive nationalism is a state of mind which is
artifi cially induced by the prevalent obsession of nations
that they must, at all times, be prepared for
war. If the danger of war were eliminated, nationalism
would soon disappear.
From “I Am an American,” June 22, 1940. Einstein Archives
29-092. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
470–472
There are times when the climate of the world is
good for ethical things. Sometimes men trust one
another and create good. At other times, it is not so.
 
On Politics and Patriotism 297
From a conversation recorded by Algernon Black, Fall
1940. Einstein forbade the publication of this conversation.
Einstein Archives 54-834
When people live in a time of maladjustment, when
there is tension and disequilibrium, they become
unbalanced themselves and then may follow an unbalanced
leader.
Ibid.
The greatest weakness of the democracies is economic
fear.
Ibid.
*Laws alone cannot secure freedom of expression; in
order that every man presents his views without
penalty, there must be a spirit of tolerance in the entire
population.
From Einstein’s contribution to Freedom, Its Meaning, ed.
Ruth Nanda Anshen (1940). Einstein Archives 28-538
*What is a capitalist state? It is a state in which the
principal means of production, such as farmland,
real estate in the cities, the supply of water, gas, and
electricity, public transportation, as well as the larger
industrial plants are owned by a minority of the citizenry.
Productivity is geared toward making a profi t
for the owners rather than providing the population
with a uniform distribution of essential goods. . . .
 
298 The Quotations
A state can be characterized as “socialistic” when
the principal means of production are owned collectively
and are administered by individuals responsible
to them and who are paid by the state.
From “Is There Room for Individual Freedom in a Socialist
State?” ca. July 1945. Einstein Archives 28-661. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 436
*My answer to this is that freedom, in any case, is
only possible by constantly struggling for it. A citizenry
that is politically indifferent will always end
up enslaved no matter what form its constitution
and legal institutions take. I am convinced, however,
that in a state with a socialist economy the
prospects are better for the average individual to
achieve the maximum degree of freedom that is
compatible with the well-being of the community.
On the possibility of individual freedoms in a socialist society.
Ibid.
*As for socialism, unless it is international to the extent
of producing a world government which controls
all military power, it might lead to wars even
more easily than capitalism because it represents an
even greater concentration of power.
From “Einstein on the Atomic Bomb,” part 1, an interview
recorded by Raymond Swing, Atlantic Monthly 176, no. 5
(November 1945), 43–45. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 373–378
 
On Politics and Patriotism 299
*If you occasionally hear my name mentioned in
connection with political excursions, don’t think
that I spend much time on such things, as it would
be sad to waste much energy on the meager soil of
politics. From time to time, however, the moment
arrives when I cannot help myself.
To Michele Besso, April 21, 1946. Einstein Archives 7-381
Democratic institutions and standards are the result
of historic developments to an extent not always appreciated
in the lands which enjoy them.
From “Einstein on the Atomic Bomb,” part 2, an interview
recorded by Raymond Swing, Atlantic Monthly, November
1947
To act intelligently in human affairs is only possible
if an attempt is made to understand the thoughts,
motives, and apprehensions of one’s opponent so
fully that one can see the world through his eyes.
From “Reply to the Soviet Scientists,” December 1947, published
in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 4, no. 2 (February
1948), 35–37. Also see Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 393–397; and Ideas and Opinions, 140–146. Einstein
Archives 28-795
*I also believe that capitalism or, we should say,
the system of free enterprise will prove unable to
check unemployment, which will become increasingly
chronic because of technological progress, and
 
300 The Quotations
unable to maintain a healthy balance between production
and the purchasing power of the people.
Ibid.
*On the other hand, we should not make the mistake
of blaming capitalism for all existing social and
political evils, and of assuming that the very establishment
of socialism would be able to cure all the
social and political ills of humanity. The danger of
such a belief lies, first, in the fact that it encourages
fanatical intolerance on the part of all the “faithfuls”
by making a possible social method into a type of
church which brands all those who do not belong to
it as traitors or as nasty evildoers. Once this stage
has been reached, the ability to understand the convictions
and actions of the “unfaithfuls” vanishes
completely. You know, I am sure, from history how
much unnecessary suffering such rigid beliefs have
infl icted upon mankind.
Ibid.
Any government is in itself an evil insofar as it
carries within it the tendency to deteriorate into
tyranny.
Ibid.
*Socialism as such cannot be considered the solution
to all social problems but merely as a framework
within which such a solution is possible.
 
On Politics and Patriotism 301
Ibid. See the similar statement for the Cheyney Record regarding
democracy below.
*We are reminded by them that even the most perfect
democratic institutions are no better than the
people who are their agents.
For the Sacco and Vanzetti Memorial, 1947. Einstein Archives
28-770
We must learn the difficult lesson that the future of
mankind will only be tolerable when our course, in
world affairs as in all other matters, is based upon
justice and law rather than the threat of naked
power.
From a message for the Gandhi memorial service, February
11, 1948. Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on
Peace, 468. Einstein Archives 5-151
*Democracy, taken in its narrower, purely political,
sense suffers from the weakness that the bearers of
the economic and political power have at their disposal
powerful means to mold public opinion to
serve their class interests. The democratic form of
government in itself does not automatically solve
the problems; it offers, however, a useful framework
for their solution.
From an interview with Milton James of the Cheyney Record,
the student publication of Cheyney State Teachers
College in Pennsylvania, October 7, 1948. Corrected from
my earlier version. See also the similar statement about
 
302 The Quotations
socialism above. See Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace,
502. Einstein Archives 58-013 to 58-015
*Under the Russian system as it is today everything
depends on the intentions and qualities of a few
men in whose hands the whole power is concentrated.
The position of the individual under that
rule can be characterized thus: Considerable economic
security at the expense of liberty and political
rights.
Ibid.
*It is a happy fate to remain fascinated by one’s
work up to the last gasp. Otherwise we would suffer
too much from the stupidity and madness of
man as manifested mainly in politics.
To Michele Besso, July 24, 1949. Einstein Archives 7-386
Tito and Stalin’s little dance shows socialism is not a
path to gentleness.
To Otto Nathan, August 13, 1949. Bergreen Albert Einstein
Collection, Vassar College, Box M2003-009, Folder 2.12.
Einstein Archives 38-584
*It cannot be doubted that the achievements of the
Soviet Regime are considerable in the fields of education,
public health, social welfare, and economics,
and that the people as a whole have greatly gained
by these achievements.
 
On Politics and Patriotism 303
To Sidney Hook, May 16, 1950. See, however, Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 456–457, for evidence that
Einstein had “no sympathy at all for the dogmatic brand of
Marxism [the Soviet regime] promulgated as offi cial state
doctrine.” Einstein Archives 59-1018
I have never been a Communist. But if I were, I
would not be ashamed of it.
To Lydia B. Hewes, July 10, 1950. Einstein Archives 59-984
Everyone who is in the business of dispensing reliable
information today has the duty to enlighten the
public. For even a conscientious person cannot reach
reasonable political conclusions without trustworthy,
factual information.
To Otto Nathan, November 5, 1950 (or perhaps May 11,
1950; dated 11-5-1950). Folder 2.14, Bergreen Albert Einstein
Collection, Vassar College, Box M2003-009, Folder 2.14. Einstein
Archives 38-586
I can see only the revolutionary way of non-cooperation
in the sense of Gandhi’s. Every intellectual
who is called before one of the committees ought to
refuse to testify; i.e., he must be prepared for jail and
economic ruin . . . in the interest of the cultural welfare
of his country.
To Brooklyn teacher William Frauenglass, who was called
before the Senate’s Internal Security Subcommittee (its
equivalent of the House Un-American Activities Committee,
or HUAC) hearings, May 16, 1953. Einstein Archives
41-112
 
304 The Quotations
Refusal to testify must be based on the assertion that
it is shameful for a blameless citizen to submit to
such an inquisition and that this kind of inquisition
violates the spirit of the Constitution.
Ibid.
There is no such [anti-Communist] hysteria in the
West European countries and there is no danger of
their governments being overthrown by force or
subversion, despite the fact that Communist parties
are not persecuted or even ostracized.
To E. Lindsay, July 18, 1953. Einstein Archives 60-326
Eastern Europe would never have become prey to
Russia if the Western powers had prevented German
aggressive fascism under Hitler, which grave
mistake made it necessary afterwards to beg Russia
for help.
Ibid.
The fear of communism has led to practices that
have become incomprehensible to the rest of civilized
mankind and expose our country to ridicule.
How long shall we tolerate politicians, hungry for
power, who are trying to gain political advantage in
such a way?
From “Human Rights,” a message to the Chicago Decalogue
Society of Lawyers upon receiving its award for
 
On Politics and Patriotism 305
contributions to human rights. The message had been written
just before December 5, 1953 (Einstein Archives 28-
1012), and was translated and recorded before being
played at the ceremony on February 20, 1954. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 497
Party membership is a thing for which no citizen is
obligated to give an accounting.
To C. Lamont, January 2, 1954. Einstein Archives 60-178
Yes, I’m an old revolutionary . . . politically I’m still
a fi re-spewing Vesuvius.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” February
9, 1954
*America is incomparably less endangered by its
own Communists than by the hysterical hunt for
the few Communists that are here. . . . Why should
America be so much more endangered than England
by the English Communists? Or is one to believe
that the English are politically more naïve than
the Americans so that they do not realize the danger
they are in?
To Norman Thomas, March 10, 1954. Einstein Archives
61-549
The current [House Un-American Activities Committee
and Senate Internal Security Subcommittee]
investigations are an incomparably greater danger
to our society than those few Communists in the
 
306 The Quotations
country ever could be. These investigations have
already undermined to a considerable extent the
democratic character of our society.
To Felix Arnold, March 19, 1954. Einstein Archives 59-118
The Russians . . . want to give me a peace prize, but
I have turned it down. That’s all I need—to be called
a Bolshevik here.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” April 2,
1954
In Plato’s time, and even later, in Jefferson’s time, it
was still possible to reconcile democracy with a
moral and intellectual aristocracy, while today democracy
is based on a different principle—namely,
that the other fellow is not better than I am.
On democracy and anti-intellectualism, in Niccolo Tucci’s
New Yorker profi le of Einstein, November 22, 1954
A good government . . . is one which gives the citizen
the maximum amount of liberty and political
rights as is desirable in his own interest. On the
other hand, the state has to provide for the citizen
personal security and a certain amount of economic
security. This situation necessitates a compromise
between those two requirements which has to be
found according to circumstances.
To Edward Shea, a Brooklyn police lieutenant, November 30,
1954. Einstein Archives 61-291
 
On Politics and Patriotism 307
*I cannot rid myself of the thought that this, the last
of my fatherlands, has invented for its own use a
new kind of colonialism. . . . It achieves domination
of other countries by investing American capital
abroad, which makes those countries firmly dependent
on the United States. Anyone who opposes this
policy or its implications is treated as an enemy of
the United States.
In his last letter to Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, January 2,
1955, on America’s postwar foreign policy. Einstein Archives
32-413
*Nothing astonishes me quite so much as the shortness
of man’s memory with regard to political developments.
Yesterday the Nuremberg trials, today
the all-out effort to rearm Germany.
Ibid.
Political passions, once they have been fanned into
fl ames, exact their victims.
Final written words, from an unfi nished draft of a radio
address on occasion of the seventh anniversary of Israel’s
independence, probably April 10–2, 1955. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 507. See also Fantova,
“Conversations with Einstein,” April 10, 1955. Einstein Archives
28-1098
That is simple, my friend: because politics is more
diffi cult than physics.
 
308 The Quotations
When asked why people could discover atoms but not the
means to control them. Recalled in the New York Times,
April 22, 1955, after Einstein’s death.
One must divide one’s time between politics and
equations. But our equations are much more important
to me, because politics is for the present, while
our equations are for eternity.
Quoted by Ernst Straus in Seelig, Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit, 71
 
On Race and Prejudice
 
 
Race is a fraud. All modern people are a conglomeration
of so many ethnic mixtures that no pure race
remains.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 450
Insofar as we may at all claim that slavery has been
abolished today, we owe its abolition to the practical
consequences of science.
From “Science and Society,” Science, Winter 1935–36. Reprinted
in Einstein on Humanism, 11, and Out of My Later
Years, 135. Einstein Archives 28-324
*It is really a rather comforting thought that in India,
too, the all-too-human trait of knavery predominates.
After all, it would be just too bad if this were
the privilege of the proud white race. I believe that
all creatures who can have young ones together are
very much the same.
To Max Born, ca. 1937–38. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
126. Born (p. 127) interprets the statement as Einstein’s rejection
of racial discrimination and national pride. Einstein
Archives 8-199
This country still has a heavy debt to discharge for
all the troubles and disabilities it has laid on the
Negro’s shoulders. . . . To the Negro and his wonderful
songs and choirs we are indebted for the fi nest
 
312 The Quotations
contribution in the realm of art which America has
so far given the world.
At the dedication of the Wall of Fame at the 1939–40
World’s Fair. Einstein Archives 28-527
*As regards conduct toward others, people would
be truly democratic were it not for the still present
dark shadow of racial prejudices, particularly toward
Negroes. I believe that each individual must
work within his or her circle to eradicate this shameful
evil.
From “On Political Freedom in the U.S.A.,” 1945. See Rowe
and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 473. Einstein Archives
28-627
There is, however, a somber point in the social outlook
of Americans. Their sense of equality and
human dignity is mainly limited to men of white
skin. . . . The more I feel like an American, the more
this situation pains me.
From “A Message to My Adopted Country,” Pageant 1,
no. 12 (January 1946). Einstein supported the fl edgling civil
rights movement, perhaps also infl uenced by Paul Robeson,
a black opera singer, former athlete, and early civil
rights advocate, who was born in Princeton, and opera
singer Marian Anderson, both of whom he befriended, as
well as his cordial interest in and interactions with the
black citizens of Princeton. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 474. See also, in general, Jerome and Taylor,
Einstein on Race and Racism.
 
On Race and Prejudice 313
The modern prejudice against Negroes is the result
of the desire to maintain this unworthy condition.
Ibid., 475, referring to the “fatal misconception” that blacks
“are not our equals in intelligence, sense of responsibility,
reliability,” and further stating that these are ancient prejudices
against slaves, both black and white
We must recognize what in our accepted tradition is
damaging to our fate and dignity—and shape our
lives accordingly.
Ibid.
*Your ancestors dragged these black people from
their homes by force; and in the white man’s quest
for wealth and an easy life they have been ruthlessly
suppressed and exploited, degraded into slavery.
The modern prejudice against Negroes is the result
of the desire to maintain this unworthy condition.
Ibid.
I believe that whoever tries to think things through
honestly will soon recognize how unworthy and even
fatal is the traditional bias against Negroes. . . . What
can the man of good will do to combat this deeply
rooted prejudice? He must have the courage to set an
example by words and deed, and must watch lest his
children become influenced by racial bias.
Ibid., 475–476
 
314 The Quotations
*The worst disease from which the society of our nation
suffers is . . . the treatment of the Negro. . . . Everyone
who freshly learns of this state of affairs at a
maturer age feels not only the injustice, but the scorn
of the principle of the Fathers who founded the
United States that “all men are created equal.”
From a letter to the National Urban League convention,
September 16, 1946. See Jerome and Taylor, Einstein on Race
and Racism, 144–145. Einstein Archives 54-543
*One can hardly believe that a reasonable man can
cling so tenaciously to such prejudice, and there is
sure to come a time in which school-children in their
history lessons will laugh about the fact that something
like this did once exist.
Ibid., 145
*We must strive . . . that minorities be protected
against economic and political discrimination as
well as against attack by libelous writings and
against the poisoning of youth in the schools. These
endeavors are important, but not as important as
the intellectual and moral enlightenment of the
people.
Ibid.
*To insure such protection [against acts of violence]
is one of the most urgent tasks for our generation.
A way always exists to overcome legal obstacles
 
On Race and Prejudice 315
whenever there is a determined will in the service of
such a just cause.
To President Harry Truman, September 1946, in support of
the American Crusade to End Lynching, which Einstein cochaired
with Paul Robeson. Quoted in the New York Times,
September 23, 1946. See Jerome and Taylor, Einstein on Race
and Racism, 143. Einstein Archives 57-103
*On reading the White article one is struck with the
deep meaning of the saying: There is only one road
to true human greatness—the road through suffering.
If the suffering springs from the blindness and
dullness of a tradition-bound society, it usually degrades
the weak to a state of blind hate.
Letter to the editor of the Saturday Review of Literature, November
11, 1947, commenting on Walter White’s article,
“Why I Remain a Negro” (SRL, October 1947). White chose
to identify as a black and worked in the civil rights movement
even though he was fair-skinned and blond enough
to pass as white. See Jerome and Taylor, Einstein on Race
and Racism, 147. Einstein Archives 28-768
*[Walter White] has allowed us to accompany him
on the painful road to human greatness by giving us
a simple biographical story which is irresistible in
its convincing power.
Ibid., 148
*The more cruel the wrong that men commit against
an individual or a people, the deeper their hatred
and contempt for their victim. Conceit and false
 
316 The Quotations
pride on the part of a nation prevent the rise of remorse
for its crime. Those who have had no part in
the crime, however, have no sympathy for the sufferings
of the innocent victims of persecution and
no awareness of human solidarity.
From statement for the Monument to the Martyred Jews
of the Warsaw Ghetto, April 19, 1948. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 349. Einstein Archives
28-815
*Race prejudice is a part of a tradition which—conditioned
by history—is uncritically handed down
from one generation to another. The only remedy is
enlightenment and education. This is a slow and
painstaking process in which all right-thinking people
should take part.
In answer to an interview by Milton James for the Cheyney
Record, the student newspaper of Cheyney State Teachers
College, a college for blacks in Pennsylvania, asking if U.S.
racial prejudice was a symptom of a worldwide confl ict,
October 7, 1948, published February 1949. Reprinted thus
in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 502: “Race prejudice
has unfortunately become an American tradition
which is uncritically handed down from one generation to
the next. The only remedies are enlightenment and education.
This is a slow and pain-staking process in which all
right-thinking people should take part.” Note that “American”
was not in the handwritten facsimile in Kaller’s autographs
catalog and in the newspaper article but was added
in Einstein on Peace. The copy (perhaps a draft) in the autographs
catalog, addressed to Milton M. James of the Record,
has it thus: “Prejudice is part of a tradition which—determined
through history—is handed down uncritically from
 
On Race and Prejudice 317
generation to generation. One can achieve liberation from
prejudice only by enlightenment and education. This is a
slow and painstaking purifying process in which every
concerned person has to participate.” Einstein Archives
58-013 to 58-015
 
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy
 
 
The way he often explained it, Einstein’s “religion”
was an attitude of cosmic awe and wonder and a devout
humility before the harmony of nature, rather
than a belief in a personal God who is able to control
the lives of individuals. He referred to this belief as
“cosmic religion.” It is incompatible with the doctrines
of all theistic religions in its denial of a personal
God who punishes the wicked and rewards
the righteous. Einstein was an admirer of Spinoza,
the seventeenth-century Dutch Jewish rationalist
philosopher, whom the German Romantic poet Novalis
called a “God-intoxicated man.” Because of
Einstein’s frequent reference to God, one might be
tempted to think of him in this way as well. For a
thorough discussion on Einstein’s religion, see Jammer,
Einstein and Religion. See also “Mysticism” in
the “Miscellaneous” section.
Why do you write to me, “God should punish the
English”? I have no close connection to either one or
the other. I see only with deep regret that God punishes
so many of his children for their numerous
stupidities, for which only he himself can be held
responsible; in my opinion, only his nonexistence
could excuse him.
To Edgar Meyer, a Swiss colleague, January 2, 1915. CPAE,
Vol. 8, Doc. 44
*Why [use] so many words when I can say all in
a . . . sentence appropriate for a Jew: Honor your
 
322 The Quotations
Master Jesus Christ not only in words and hymn,
but above all by your deeds.
From “My Opinion on the War,” in the Berliner Goethebund’s
The Land of Goethe 1914/1916, published in 1916.
CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 20
Upon reading books on philosophy, I learned that I
stood there like a blind man in front of a painting. I
can grasp only the inductive method . . . the works
of speculative philosophy are beyond my reach.
To Eduard Hartmann, April 27, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 330
The suprapersonal content conveyed by religion,
primitive in form though it is, is more valuable, I am
convinced, than Haeckel’s materialism. I believe
that even nowadays, eliminating the sacred traditions
would still mean spiritual and moral impoverishment—as
gross and ugly as the attitude and actions
of the clergy may be in many respects.
To Georg Count von Arco, January 14, 1920, in declining to
be identifi ed as a Monist. Ernst Haeckel was a relentless
fi ghter against prominent traditional religious doctrines,
but he also alienated many freethinkers with his views
on eugenics, race, and his conservative political agenda.
His brutal social ethic infl uenced the Nazis. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 260
In every true searcher of Nature there is a kind of
religious reverence, for he finds it impossible to
imagine that he is the first to have thought out
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 323
the exceedingly delicate threads that connect his
perceptions.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein, 46
Since our inner experiences consist of reproductions
and combinations of sensory impressions, the concept
of a soul without a body seems to me to be
empty and devoid of meaning.
To Viennese poet Lili Halpern-Neuda, February 5, 1921.
Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human
Side, 40. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 7
The meaning of the word “truth” varies according
to whether we deal with a fact of experience, a mathematical
proposition, or a scientific theory. “Religious
truth” conveys nothing clear to me at all.
In answer to the question, Do scientifi c and religious truths
come from different points of view? December 14, 1922,
posed by interviewers for the Japanese magazine Kaizo 5,
no. 2 (1923), 197. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 261–262
Scientifi c research can reduce superstition by encouraging
people to think and view things in terms
of cause and effect. It is certain that a conviction akin
to a religious feeling, of the rationality or intelligibility
of the world lies behind all scientific work of a
higher order.
In answer to the question, Can scientifi c discovery enhance
religious belief and repudiate superstition, since religious
feelings can give impetus to scientifi c discovery? Ibid.
 
324 The Quotations
My comprehension of God comes from the deeply
felt conviction of a superior intelligence that reveals
itself in the knowable world. In common terms, one
can describe it as “pantheistic” (Spinoza).
In answer to the question, What is your understanding of
God? Ibid.
I can look at doctrinaire traditions only with a historical
and psychological perspective; they have no
other signifi cance for me.
In answer to the question, What is your opinion regarding
a “savior”? Ibid.
I want to know how God created this world. I am
not interested in this or that phenomenon, in the
spectrum of this or that element. I want to know his
thoughts. The rest are details.
Recalled by his Berlin student Esther Salaman, 1925, in Salaman,
“A Talk with Einstein,” Listener 54 (1955), 370–371
Try and penetrate with our limited means the secrets
of nature and you will find that, behind all the
discernible concatenations, there remains something
subtle, intangible, and inexplicable. Veneration for
this force beyond anything that we can comprehend
is my religion. To that extent I am, in point of fact,
religious.
From a dinner conversation between Einstein and the German
critic Alfred Kerr, recorded by Count Harry Kessler in
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 325
his diary, The Diary of a Cosmopolitan (1971), June 14, 1927.
Also quoted in Brian, Einstein, a Life, 161
I cannot conceive of a personal God who would directly
influence the actions of individuals. . . . My
religiosity consists of a humble admiration of the in-
fi nitely superior spirit that reveals itself in the little
that we can comprehend of the knowable world.
That deeply emotional conviction of the presence of
a superior reasoning power, which is revealed in the
incomprehensible universe, forms my idea of God.
To M. Schayer, August 1, 1927. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 66, and in Einstein’s
New York Times obituary, April 19, 1955. Einstein Archives
48-380
I often read the Bible, but its original text has remained
beyond my reach.
To H. Friedmann, March 18, 1929, regarding his lack of
knowledge of the Hebrew language. Quoted in Pais, Subtle
Is the Lord, 38. Einstein Archives 30-405
I believe in Spinoza’s God, Who reveals Himself in
the lawful harmony of the world, not in a God who
concerns himself with the fate and the doings of
mankind.
In answer to Rabbi Herbert S. Goldstein’s telegram, published
in the New York Times, April 25, 1929. (Spinoza reasoned
that God and the material world are indistinguishable;
the better one understands how the universe works,
the closer one comes to God.) Goldstein felt this answer was
 
326 The Quotations
evidence that Einstein was not an atheist. See Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 17. Einstein Archives 33-272
Everything is determined . . . by forces over which
we have no control. It is determined for the insect as
well as for the star. Human beings, vegetables, or
cosmic dust—we all dance to a mysterious tune, intoned
in the distance by an invisible piper.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 452
No one can read the Gospels without feeling the actual
presence of Jesus. His personality pulsates in
every word. No myth is fi lled with such life.
In answer to the question, “Do you accept the historical
Jesus?” Ibid. Reprinted in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great,
448. Quoted in Brian, Einstein, a Life, 277 (a slightly different
version is found on his p. 186). According to Brian, Einstein,
a Life, 278, Einstein reportedly considered this interview
an accurate representation of his views. Others regard
it with extreme caution.
I am not an atheist. I do not know if I can define myself
as a pantheist. The problem involved is too vast
for our limited minds.
In answer to the question, “Do you believe in God?” Ibid.
Reprinted in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 447
*I do not believe that a moral philosophy can ever
be founded on a scientifi c basis. . . . The valuation of
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 327
life and all its nobler expressions can only come out
of the soul’s yearning toward its own destiny. Every
attempt to reduce ethics to scientific formulas must
fail. . . . On the other hand, it is undoubtedly true
that scientific study of the higher kinds and general
interest in scientific theory have great value in leading
men toward a worthier valuation of the things
of the spirit.
From “Science and God: A Dialogue,” an exchange of opinions
between Einstein, James Murphy, and J.W.N. Sullivan
in Forum and Century 83 (June 1930), 373–379
I am of the opinion that all the finer speculations in
the realm of science spring from a deep religious feeling.
. . . I also believe that this kind of religiousness . . .
is the only creative religious activity of our time.
Ibid.
There are two different conceptions about the nature
of the universe: (1) the world as a unity dependent
on humanity; (2) the world as a reality independent
of the human factor.
From a conversation with Indian mystic, poet, and musician
Rabindranath Tagore, summer 1930. Published in the
New York Times Magazine, August 10, 1930
I cannot prove scientifically that Truth must be conceived
as a truth that is valid independent of humanity,
but I firmly believe it. . . . If there is a reality
 
328 The Quotations
independent of man, there is also a truth relative to
this reality. . . . The problem begins with whether
Truth is independent of our consciousness. . . . For
instance, if nobody is in this house, that table remains
where it is.
Ibid.
The man who is thoroughly convinced of the universal
operation of the law of causation cannot for a
moment entertain the idea of a being who interferes
in the course of events. . . . He has no use for the religion
of fear and equally little for social or moral religion.
A God who rewards and punishes is inconceivable
to him for the simple reason that a man’s
actions are determined by necessity, external and internal,
so that in God’s eyes he cannot be responsible,
any more than an inanimate object is responsible
for the motions it undergoes. . . . A man’s ethical behavior
should be based effectively on sympathy, education,
and social relationships; no religious basis
is necessary. Man would indeed be in a poor way if
he had to be restrained by fear of punishment and
hope of reward after death.
From “Religion and Science,” New York Times Magazine,
November 9, 1930, 1–4. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions,
36–40. See also Berliner Tageblatt, November 11, 1930. This
version is taken from Ideas and Opinions, 36–40, whose
translators chose not to follow the New York Times version.
Everything the human race has done and thought is
concerned with the satisfaction of deeply felt needs
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 329
and the assuagement of pain. One has to keep this
constantly in mind if one wishes to understand religious
movements and their development. Feeling
and longing are the motive force behind all human
endeavor and human creation, in however exalted a
guise the latter may present themselves to us.
Ibid.
*The beginnings of cosmic religious feeling already
appear at an early stage of development, e.g., in
many of the Psalms of David and in some of the
Prophets. Buddhism, as we have learned especially
from the wonderful writings of Schopenhauer, contains
a much stronger element of this.
Ibid.
It is very difficult to elucidate this [cosmic religious]
feeling to anyone who is entirely without it. . . . The
religious geniuses of all ages have been distinguished
by this kind of religious feeling, which
knows no dogma and no God conceived in man’s
image; so that there can be no church whose central
teachings are based on it. . . . In my view, it is the
most important function of art and science to awaken
this feeling and keep it alive in those who are receptive
to it.
On “cosmic religion,” a worship of the harmony and beauties
of nature that became the common faith of many physicists.
Ibid.
 
330 The Quotations
I will call it the cosmic religious sense. This is hard
to make clear to those who do not experience it,
since it does not involve an anthropomorphic idea
of God; the individual feels the vanity of human desires
and aims, and the nobility and marvelous order
which are revealed in nature and in the world of
thought.
Ibid.
I assert that the cosmic religious experience is the
strongest and the noblest driving force behind scientifi
c research.
Ibid.
*I cannot imagine a God who rewards and punishes
the objects of his creation, whose purposes are modeled
after our own—a God, in short, who is but a re-
fl ection of human frailty. Neither can I believe that
the individual survives the death of his body, although
feeble souls harbor such thoughts through
fear or ridiculous egotism. It is enough for me to
contemplate the mystery of conscious life perpetuating
itself through all eternity, to reflect upon the
marvelous structure of the universe which we can
dimly perceive, and to try humbly to comprehend
even an infinitesimal part of the intelligence manifested
in nature.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930), 193–
194. Reprinted in Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics,
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 331
229–230. Variously translated and used elsewhere, including
in earlier editions of this book.
The most beautiful thing we can experience is the
mysterious. It is the source of all true art and science.
He to whom this emotion is a stranger, who can no
longer pause to wonder and stand rapt in awe, is as
good as dead: his eyes are closed. This insight into
the mystery of life, coupled though it be with fear,
has also given rise to religion. To know that what is
impenetrable to us really exists, manifesting itself as
the highest wisdom and the most radiant beauty
which our dull faculties can comprehend only in
their most primitive forms—this knowledge, this
feeling, is at the center of true religiousness. In this
sense, and in this sense only, I belong in the ranks of
devoutly religious men.
Ibid.
*We must never forget that the most courageous
fi ghters against militarism come from a religious
group, from among the Quakers.
To Henri Barbusse, June 17, 1932. Einstein Archives
34-546
Philosophy is like a mother who gave birth to
and endowed all the other sciences. Therefore, one
should not scorn her in her nakedness and poverty,
but should hope, rather, that part of her Don Quixote
 
332 The Quotations
ideal will live on in her children so that they do not
sink into philistinism.
To Bruno Winawer, September 8, 1932. Quoted in Dukas
and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 106. Einstein
Archives 52-267
Our actions should be based on the ever-present
awareness that human beings in their thinking, feeling,
and acting are not free but are just as causally
bound as the stars in their motion.
From a statement to the Spinoza Society of America, September
22, 1932. Einstein Archives 33-291
If one purges all subsequent additions from the
original teachings of the Prophets and Christianity,
especially those of the priests, one is left with a doctrine
that is capable of curing all the social ills of
humankind.
From a statement for the Romanian Jewish journal Renasterea
Noastra, January 1933. Published in Mein Weltbild; reprinted
in Ideas and Opinions, 184–185
Organized religion may regain some of the respect it
lost in the last war if it dedicates itself to mobilizing
the good-will and energy of its followers against the
rising tide of illiberalism.
Quoted in the New York Times, April 30, 1934. Broadcasted
message for Brotherhood Day. Also quoted in Pais, Einstein
Lived Here, 205
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 333
You will hardly find one among the profounder sort
of scientific minds without a religious feeling of his
own. But it is different from the religiosity of the
naïve man. For the latter, God is a being from whose
care one hopes to benefit and whose punishment
one fears; a sublimation of a feeling similar to that of
a child for its father.
From “The Religious Spirit of Science.” Published in Mein
Weltbild (1934), 18; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 40
The scientist is possessed by a sense of universal
causation. . . . His religious feeling takes the form of
a rapturous amazement at the harmony of natural
law, which reveals an intelligence of such superiority
that, compared with it, all the systematic thinking
and acting of human beings is an utterly insignifi
cant reflection. . . . It is beyond question closely
akin to that which has possessed the religious geniuses
of all ages.
Ibid.
What is the meaning of human life, or for that matter,
of the life of any creature? To know an answer to
this question means to be religious. You ask: Does it
make any sense, then, to pose this question? I answer:
The man who regards his own life and that of
his fellow creatures as meaningless is not merely
unhappy but hardly fi t for life.
Published in Mein Weltbild (1934), 10; reprinted as “The
Meaning of Life” in Ideas and Opinions, 11
 
334 The Quotations
Everyone has been given an endowment that he
must strive to develop in the service of mankind.
This cannot be brought to completion through the
threat of a God who will punish man for sin, but
only by challenging the best in human nature.
From an interview in Survey Graphic 24 (August 1935),
384, 413
Whatever there is of God and goodness in the universe,
it must work itself out and express itself
through us. We cannot stand aside and let God do it.
From a conversation recorded by Algernon Black, Fall
1940. Einstein forbade the publication of this conversation.
Einstein Archives 54-834
To [the sphere of religion] belongs the faith in the
possibility that the regulations valid for the world of
existence are rational, that is, comprehensible to reason.
I cannot conceive of a genuine scientist without
that profound faith.
From “Science, Philosophy, and Religion,” a written contribution
to a symposium held in New York in 1940 on how
science, philosophy, and religion advance the cause of
American democracy; published in 1941 by the Conference
on Science, Philosophy and Religion in Their Relation to
the Democratic Way of Life. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions
as “Science and Religion,” 44–47. Einstein Archives 28-523
A religious person is devout in the sense that he
has no doubt about the significance of those super-
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 335
personal objects and goals that neither require nor
are capable of rational foundation.
Ibid. See Ideas and Opinions, 45
Science without religion is lame, religion without
science is blind.
Ibid. See Ideas and Opinions, 46. This may be a play on
Kant’s “Notion without intuition is empty, intuition without
notion is blind”; Einstein was not always totally original.
Some scientists, perhaps many, disagree with Einstein’s
sentiment. (See, for example, Dyson, “Writing a
Foreword for Alice Calaprice’s New Einstein Book,”
491–502.)
The main source of the present-day conflicts between
the spheres of religion and science lies in the
concept of a personal God.
Ibid. See Ideas and Opinions, 47
The highest principles for our aspirations and judgments
are given to us in the Judeo-Christian religious
tradition. It is a very high goal that we, with
our very weak powers, can reach only very inadequately,
but which gives a sure foundation to our
aspirations and values. . . . There is no room in this
for the deification of a nation, of a class, let alone of
an individual. Are we not all children of one Father,
as it is said in religious language?
Ibid. See Ideas and Opinions, 43
 
336 The Quotations
It is only to the individual that a soul is given.
Ibid. That is, not to a class or nation.
In their struggle for the ethical good, teachers of religion
must have the stature to give up the doctrine
of a personal God, that is, give up that source of fear
and hope which in the past placed such vast power
in the hands of priests.
Ibid., 48
Whoever has undergone the intense experience of
successful advances made in this domain [science]
is moved by profound reverence for the rationality
made manifest in existence.
Ibid., 49
The further the spiritual evolution of mankind advances,
the more certain it seems to me that the path
to genuine religiosity does not lie through the fear
of life, and the fear of death, and blind faith, but
through striving after rational knowledge.
Ibid.
In view of such harmony in the cosmos which I,
with my limited human mind, am able to recognize,
there are yet people who say there is no God. But
what makes me really angry is that they quote me
for support of such views.
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 337
Said to German anti-Nazi diplomat and author Hubertus
zu Löwenstein around 1941. Quoted in his book, Towards
the Further Shore (London, 1968), 156. With this remark,
Einstein dissociates himself from atheism; see Jammer, Einstein
and Religion, 97
Then there are the fanatical atheists whose intolerance
is the same as that of the religious fanatics, and
it springs from the same source. . . . They are creatures
who can’t hear the music of the spheres.
To an unidentifi ed person, August 7, 1941, on the reaction
to his symposium contribution, “Science, Philosophy, and
Religion” (1940). To many readers, Einstein’s denial of a
“personal” God meant a total denial of God, because “there
is no other God but a personal God.” See discussion in
Jammer, Einstein and Religion, 92–108. Einstein Archives
54-927
It is quite possible that we can do greater things than
Jesus, for what is written in the Bible about him is
poetically embellished.
Quoted in W. Hermanns, “A Talk with Einstein,” October
1943. Einstein Archives 55-285
No idea is conceived in our mind independent of
our fi ve senses [i.e., no idea is divinely inspired].
Ibid.
I would not think that philosophy and reason themselves
will be man’s guide in the foreseeable future;
 
338 The Quotations
however, they will remain the most beautiful sanctuary
they have always been for the select few.
To Benedetto Croce, June 7, 1944. Quoted in Pais, Einstein
Lived Here, 122. Einstein Archives 34-075
Thus I came . . . to a deep religiosity, which, however,
found an abrupt ending at the age of 12. Through
the reading of popular scientific books I soon reached
the conviction that much in the stories of the Bible
could not be true. . . . Suspicion against every kind
of authority grew out of this experience . . . an attitude
which has never again left me.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 3–5
Out yonder there was this huge world, which exists
independently of us human beings and which
stands before us like a great, eternal riddle, at least
partially accessible to our inspection and thinking.
The contemplation of this world beckoned like a liberation,
and I soon noticed that many a man I had
learned to esteem and admire had found inner freedom
and security in devoted occupation with it.
Ibid., 5
My views are near those of Spinoza: admiration
for the beauty and belief in the logical simplicity of
the order and harmony that we can grasp humbly
and only imperfectly. I believe that we have to content
ourselves with our imperfect knowledge and
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 339
understanding and treat values and moral obligations
as purely human problems.
To Marvin Magalaner, April 26, 1947. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 95. Einstein Archives
58-461
It is this . . . symbolic content of the religious traditions
which is likely to come into conflict with science.
. . . Thus it is of vital importance for the preservation
of true religion that such conflicts be avoided
when they arise from subjects which, in fact, are not
really essential for the pursuit of religious aims.
From a statement to the Liberal Ministers Club, New York
City. Published in the Christian Register, June 1948; reprinted
as “Religion and Science: Irreconcilable?” in Ideas
and Opinions, 49–52
While it is true that scientific results are entirely independent
of religious or moral considerations,
those individuals to whom we owe the great creative
achievements in science were all imbued with
the truly religious conviction that this universe of
ours is something perfect and is responsive to the
rational striving for knowledge.
Ibid.
A human being is a part of the whole, called by us
“Universe,” a part limited in time and space. He experiences
himself, his thoughts and feelings as
something separate from the rest—a kind of optical
 
340 The Quotations
delusion of his consciousness. The striving to free
oneself from this delusion is the one issue of true religion.
Not to nourish it but to try to overcome it
is the way to reach the attainable measure of peace
of mind.
To Robert Marcus, a distraught father who asked Einstein
for some comforting words after the death of his young
son, February 12, 1950. In Calaprice, Dear Professor Einstein,
184. Einstein Archives 60-424
My position concerning God is that of an agnostic. I
am convinced that a vivid consciousness of the primary
importance of moral principles for the betterment
and ennoblement of life does not need the idea
of a law-giver, especially a law-giver who works on
the basis of reward and punishment.
To M. Berkowitz, October 25, 1950. Einstein Archives
59-215
I have found no better expression than “religious”
for confidence in the rational nature of reality, insofar
as it is accessible to human reason. Whenever
this feeling is absent, science degenerates into uninspired
empiricism.
To Maurice Solovine, January 1, 1951. Published in Letters
to Solovine, 119. Einstein Archives 21-474
Mere unbelief in a personal God is no philosophy
at all.
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 341
To V. T. Aaltonen, May 7, 1952, on his opinion that belief in
a personal God is better than atheism. Einstein Archives
59-059
My feeling is religious insofar as I am imbued with
the consciousness of the insufficiency of the human
mind to understand more deeply the harmony of
the universe which we try to formulate as “laws of
nature.”
To Beatrice Frohlich, December 17, 1952. Einstein Archives
59-797
The idea of a personal God is quite alien to me and
seems even naïve.
Ibid.
To assume the existence of an unperceivable being . . .
does not facilitate understanding the orderliness we
fi nd in the perceivable world.
To D. Albaugh, an Iowa student who asked, “What is
God?” July 21, 1953. Einstein Archives 59-085
I do not believe in the immortality of the individual,
and I consider ethics to be an exclusively human
concern with no superhuman authority behind it.
To A. Nickerson, a Baptist pastor, July 1953. Quoted in
Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 39.
Einstein Archives 36-553
 
342 The Quotations
*The word God is for me nothing more than the expression
and product of human weaknesses, and
the Bible a collection of honorable but still primitive,
rather childish legends. No interpretation, no matter
how elegant, can change this [for me].
To philosopher Eric Gutkind, January 3, 1954. See more in
the section “On Jews, Israel, Judaism, and Zionism.” The
half-page handwritten letter sold for £170,000 ($404,000) at
a Bloomsbury auction in London on May 15, 2008, a record
for a single Einstein letter and twenty-fi ve times the presale
estimate. New York Times, May 17, 2008. Einstein Archives
33-337
If God created the world, his primary concern was
certainly not to make its understanding easy for us.
To David Bohm, February 10, 1954. Einstein Archives 8-041
I consider the Society of Friends the religious community
that has the highest moral standards. As far
as I know, they have never made evil compromises
and are always guided by their conscience. In international
life, especially, their influence seems to me
very benefi cial and effective.
To A. Chapple, Australia, February 23, 1954. Quoted in Nathan
and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 511. Einstein Archives
59-405
I do not believe in a personal God and I have never
denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something
is in me that can be called religious, then it is
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 343
the unbounded admiration for the structure of the
world so far as science can reveal it.
To an admirer who questioned him about his religious beliefs,
March 22, 1954. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 43. Einstein Archives 39-525
I don’t try to imagine a God; it suffices to stand in
awe of the structure of the world, insofar as it allows
our inadequate senses to appreciate it.
To S. Flesch, April 16, 1954. Einstein Archives 30-1154
A man’s moral worth is not measured by what his
religious beliefs are, but rather by what emotional
impulses he has received from Nature.
To Sister Margrit Goehner, February 1955. Einstein Archives
59-830
Isn’t all of philosophy like writing in honey? It looks
wonderful at first sight, but when you look again it
is all gone. Only the smear is left.
As recalled by Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientifi c
Truth, 90
*As long as you pray to God and ask him for something,
you are not a religious man.
In a conversation with Leo Szilard, date unknown, cited
in Spencer R. Weart and Gertrud Weiss Szilard, eds., Leo
Szilard: His Version of the Facts (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1978), 12. Quoted slightly differently in Jammer,
 
344 The Quotations
Einstein and Religion, 149, where the words are probably
wrongly sourced as having been written to Szilard; after
a thorough search, we were unable to fi nd a letter in
the archives containing these words. Thanks to Szilard
specialist Gene Dannen for clearing up this long-standing
puzzle.
What really interests me is whether God could have
created the world any differently; in other words,
whether the requirement of logical simplicity admits
a margin of freedom.
Quoted by Einstein’s assistant Ernst Straus, on the question
of whether God had any choice in the design of the world,
in Seelig, Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit, 72. Believers in intelligent
design creation interpret this statement as support for an
intelligent designer, not grasping that Einstein was using a
metaphor while puzzling if it is possible to build more
than one universe that is logically consistent.
We know nothing about it all [God, the world]. All
our knowledge is but the knowledge of schoolchildren.
Possibly we shall know a little more than we
do now. But the real nature of things, that we shall
never know, never.
From an interview with Chaim Tchernowitz, The Sentinel,
date unknown
Papagoyim.
Einstein’s name for the followers of the Catholic Church—
i.e., the goyim (non-Jews) who follow the papa, or pope. The
German for parrot is Papagei, and, according to archivist
Barbara Wolff, Einstein is surely playing on that word to
 
On Religion, God, and Philosophy 345
mean that the followers of the pope parrot what he says. It
is also evocative of the plumage-clad Papageno and Papagena
in Mozart’s The Magic Flute. Thanks to Einstein
scholar John Stachel, a former editor of CPAE, for this gem,
passed on to him by Einstein’s secretary, Helen Dukas.
 
 
On Science and Scientists,
Mathematics, and Technology
 
 
Einstein is most famous for his theory of relativity.
In his fi rst papers he referred to it as the “relativity
principle.” The term “theory of relativity” was fi rst
used by Max Planck in 1906 to describe the LorentzEinstein
equations of motion for the electron, and it
was fi nally adopted by Einstein in 1907 in his reply
to an article by Paul Ehrenfest, who had also used
Planck’s term. But Einstein continued to use “relativity
principle” in the titles of articles for several
years, since a “principle” is not a “theory” but
something that is borne in mind when formulating
a theory. In 1915, Einstein began to refer to the 1905
theory, having to do with space and time, as the
“special theory,” to distinguish it from his new theory
of gravitation, the “general theory.” See Stachel
et al., Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 101–102; and Fölsing,
Albert Einstein, 208–210
Examples of a similar kind, and the failure of attempts
to detect a motion of the Earth relative to the
“light medium,” lead to the conjecture that not only
in mechanics, but in electrodynamics as well, the
phenomena do not have any properties corresponding
to the concept of absolute rest, but that in all coordinate
systems in which the mechanical equations
are valid, the same electrodynamic and optical laws
are also valid, as has already been shown for quantities
of the fi rst order.
This sentence lays out the basic idea Einstein wants to
develop in his theory of special relativity. See “On the
 
350 The Quotations
Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” Annalen der Physik 19,
1905. In CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 23
E  mc2.
Statement of the equivalence of mass and energy—energy
equals mass times the speed of light squared—which
opened up the atomic age, though Einstein had no premonition
or foresight about it at the time. The original statement
was: “If a body emits the energy L in the form of radiation,
its mass decreases by L/V2
.” (Originally in “Ist die
Trägheit eines Körpers von seinem Energieinhalt abhängig?”
Annalen der Physik 18 [1905], 639–641. See Stachel et al.,
Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 161, for a translation of this paper.)
Note that Einstein used L (among other letters) to denote energy
at least until 1912, when, in his “Manuscript on the
Special Theory of Relativity” (see CPAE, Vol. 4, Doc. 1), he
crossed out the L and substituted E in equations 28 and 28
of the handwritten manuscript. (See the facsimile edition
of the manuscript published by George Braziller with the
Safra Foundation and the Israel Museum, Jerusalem [1996],
119 and 121; and CPAE, Vol. 4, Doc. 1, 58–59.) Interestingly,
as pointed out to me by Ralph Baierlein, he did the same
in a manuscript as late as January 1922 (see CPAE, Vol. 7,
Doc. 31, p. 259).
The equation derives from the special theory of
relativity, which played a decisive role in the investigation
and development of nuclear energy. A mass
can be converted into a vast amount of energy
(i.e., when a particle is released from an atom it is
converted to energy), demonstrating a fundamental
relationship in nature. The theory also introduced a
new definition of space and time. For direct experimental
evidence in its favor, however, it had to wait
twenty-five years, when the conversion of mass
into energy was confirmed in the study of nuclear
 
On Science and Mathematics 351
reactions; time dilation was not directly proved
until 1938.
(Note: The following six quotations are out of chronological
order, but I placed them here because they
refl ect Einstein’s thoughts leading to the 1905 special
theory.)
What if one were to run after a ray of light? . . . What
if one were riding on the beam? . . . If one were to
run fast enough, would it no longer move at all? . . .
What is the “velocity of light”? If it is in relation
to something, this value does not hold in relation to
something else which is itself in motion.
Based on a conversation with psychologist Max Wertheimer
in 1916, in which Einstein attempted to explain his
thought process when he formulated the special theory of
relativity. See Wertheimer, Productive Thinking (1945; reprinted
by Harper, 1959), 218.
*For me it was always incomprehensible why the
theory of relativity, whose concepts and problems
are so far removed from practical life, should have
found such a lively, even passionate resonance in the
widest circles of the population for such a long time.
From the foreword to Philipp Frank, Einstein, ca. 1942. See
also Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 130. Einstein
Archives 28-581
After ten years of reflection, such a principle resulted
from a paradox upon which I had already hit
 
352 The Quotations
at the age of sixteen: If I pursue a beam of light with
the velocity c (velocity of light in a vacuum), I should
observe such a beam of light as a spatially oscillating
electromagnetic fi eld at rest. . . . From the very
beginning it appeared to me intuitively clear that,
judged from the standpoint of such an observer, everything
would have to happen according to the
same laws as for an observer who, relative to earth,
was at rest.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 53
*I despaired of the possibility of discovering the true
laws by means of constructive efforts based on
known facts. The longer and more despairingly I
tried, the more I came to the conviction that only the
discovery of a universal formal principle could lead
us to assured results. The example I saw before me
was thermodynamics.
Ibid.
The special theory of relativity owes its origin to
Maxwell’s equations of the electromagnetic fi eld.
Conversely, the latter can be grasped formally in
satisfactory fashion only by way of the special theory
of relativity.
Ibid., 63
That the special theory of relativity is only the fi rst
step of a necessary development became completely
 
On Science and Mathematics 353
clear to me only in my efforts to represent gravitation
in the framework of this theory.
Ibid.
Five or six weeks elapsed between the conception of
the idea for the special theory of relativity and the
completion of the relevant publication.
To Carl Seelig, March 11, 1952. Einstein Archives 39-013
My direct path to the special theory of relativity was
mainly determined by the conviction that the electromotive
force induced in a conductor moving in
a magnetic field is nothing other than an electric
fi eld.
From a message read at a celebration of the centennial of
Albert Michelson’s birth, December 19, 1952, at Case Institute.
See Stachel et al., Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 111. Einstein
Archives 1-168
According to the assumption considered here, in the
propagation of a light ray emitted from a point
source, the energy is not distributed continuously
over ever-increasing volumes of space, but consists
of a finite number of energy quanta localized at
points of space that move without dividing and can
be absorbed or generated only as complete units.
From “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production
and Transformation of Light,” March 1905. See Stachel
et al., Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 178. Considered by
some to be the most revolutionary sentence written by a
 
354 The Quotations
twentieth-century physicist; see Fölsing, Albert Einstein,
143. CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 14
*We cannot ascribe absolute meaning to the concept
of simultaneity; instead, two events that are simultaneous
when observed from some particular coordinate
system can no longer be considered simultaneous
when observed from a system that is moving
relative to that system.
From “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” (1905),
in Stachel et al., Einstein’s Miraculous Year, 130. CPAE,
Vol. 2, Doc. 23
I’ve completely solved the problem. My solution
was to analyze the concept of time. Time cannot be
absolutely defined, and there is an inseparable relation
between time and signal velocity.
Said to Michele Besso, May 1905, in reference to his forthcoming
publication, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving
Bodies,” on the relativity principle in electrodynamics,
later to be called the special theory of relativity. Recalled
during Einstein’s lecture in Kyoto, December 14, 1922. See
Physics Today (August 1982), 46
[I will send you] four papers. [The first] deals with
radiation and the energetic properties of light and is
very revolutionary. . . . The second paper determines
the true size of atoms by way of diffusion and the
viscosity of diluted solutions of neutral substances.
The third proves that, assuming the molecular theory
of heat, bodies on the order of magnitude of
 
On Science and Mathematics 355
1/1000mm, when suspended in liquids, must already
have an observable random motion that is
produced by thermal motion. . . . The fourth paper
is only a rough draft right now, and is about the
electrodynamics of moving bodies that employs a
modifi ed theory of space and time.
To Conrad Habicht, May 1905, giving him a foretaste of
Einstein’s annus mirabilis, during which he published, at
the age of twenty-six, altogether fi ve important papers that
ushered physics into a new era. See Stachel et al., Einstein’s
Miraculous Year, for a presentation and discussion of the
papers. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 27
*One more consequence of the electrodynamical
paper has also occurred to me. The principle of relativity,
together with Maxwell’s equations, requires
that mass be a direct measure of the energy contained
in a body; light transfers mass. . . . The contemplation
is amusing and attractive, but I don’t
know if the good Lord is laughing at it and leading
me around by the nose.
To Conrad Habicht, Summer 1905. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 28
From this we conclude that a balance-wheel clock
located at the Earth’s equator must go more slowly,
by a very small amount, than a precisely similar
clock situated at one of the poles under otherwise
identical conditions.
From “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.” Originally
in “Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper,” Annalen
 
356 The Quotations
der Physik 17 (1905), 891–921. See CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 23. This
is the paper in which Einstein introduces special relativity.
According to a letter I received from Professor Emeritus
I. J. Good of Virginia Tech in Blacksburg, Einstein neglected
to add that he was assuming the frame of reference of the
observer at the pole. In other inertial frames of reference,
the clock of the person on the equator seems to go more
slowly than that of the person at the pole at least some of
the time, but not necessarily all of the time, as Einstein
seems to be saying. This lapse in exposition (or possibly a
mistake) led physicist Herbert Dingle astray; he spent
many years producing incorrect arguments against the special
theory of relativity.
All our judgments in which time plays a role are
judgments about simultaneous events. If I say, for
example, “the train arrives here at 7,” this means:
the coincidence of the small hand of my watch with
the number 7 and the arrival of the train are simultaneous
events.
Ibid.
(1) The laws according to which the states of a
physical system change do not depend on which
of the two coordinate systems, in uniform relative
motion, these laws refer to. (2) Every light ray
moves in a “rest” coordinate system with a definite
speed c, whether emitted from a stationary or moving
force.
Ibid. According to Leopold Infeld (Albert Einstein, 24),
these are the foundations on which relativity theory is
based.
 
On Science and Mathematics 357
*So far we have applied the principle of relativity,
i.e., the assumption that the physical laws are independent
of the state of motion of the reference system,
only to nonaccelerated reference systems. Is it
conceivable that the principle of relativity also applies
to systems that are accelerated relative to each
other?
First paragraph of Part 5, Sec. 17 of “The Principle of Relativity
and the Conclusions Drawn from It” (1907), laying
the groundwork for the general theory of relativity of 1915.
CPAE, Vol. 2, Doc. 47
Thanks to my fortunate idea of introducing the relativity
principle into physics, you (and others) now
enormously overrate my scientific abilities, to the
point where this makes me quite uncomfortable.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, January 14, 1908. CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 73
A physical theory can be satisfactory only if its structures
are composed of elementary foundations. The
theory of relativity is ultimately as little satisfactory
as, for example, classical thermodynamics was before
Boltzmann had interpreted the entropy as
probability.
Ibid.
People who have been privileged to contribute
something to the advancement of science should
 
358 The Quotations
not let [arguments about priority] becloud their joy
over the fruits of common endeavor.
To Johannes Stark, February 22, 1908. A few days earlier,
Einstein had expressed some annoyance that Stark failed
to recognize Einstein’s priority in regard to the relativistic
relationship between mass and energy, which Stark had
attributed to Max Planck in a paper in the Physikalische
Zeitschrift in December 1907. See CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 88, and
Doc. 70, n. 3
It seems that scientific distinction and personal
qualities do not always go hand in hand. I value a
harmonious person far more than the craftiest formula
jockey or experimentalist.
To Jakob Laub, March 16, 1910, lauding Laub’s boss, Alfred
Kleiner. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 199
The more success the quantum theory has, the sillier
it looks. How nonphysicists would scoff if they were
able to follow the odd course of developments!
To Heinrich Zangger, May 20, 1912, refl ecting Einstein’s
early lack of faith in the quantum theory. CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 398
The “theory of relativity” is correct insofar as the two
principles upon which it is based are correct. Since
these do seem to be largely correct, the theory of relativity
in its present form seems to represent an important
advance. I do not think that it has hampered
the further development of theoretical physics!
 
On Science and Mathematics 359
From “Reply to Comment by M. Abraham,” August 1912.
CPAE, Vol. 4, Doc. 8
I am now working exclusively on the gravitation
problem. . . . One thing is certain: never before in
my life have I troubled myself over anything so
much, and I have gained enormous respect for mathematics,
whose more subtle parts I considered until
now . . . as pure luxury! Compared with this problem,
the original theory of relativity is child’s play.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, October 29, 1912, indicating his
diffi culties with advanced mathematics in formulating the
general theory of relativity, with which his friend Marcel
Grossmann helped him. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 421
I cannot find the time to write because I am occupied
with truly great things. Day and night I rack
my brain in an effort to penetrate more deeply into
the things that I gradually discovered in the past
two years and that represent an unprecedented advance
in the fundamental problems of physics.
To Elsa Löwenthal, February 1914, about his work on an
extension of his theory of gravitation, the fi rst stage of
which was published half a year earlier. CPAE, Vol. 5,
Doc. 509
Nature is showing us only the tail of the lion, but
I have no doubt that the lion belongs to it even
though, because of its large size, it cannot totally
 
360 The Quotations
 reveal itself all at once. We can see it only the way a
louse that is sitting on it would.
To Heinrich Zangger, March 10, 1914, regarding his work
on the general theory of relativity. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 513
The principle of relativity can generally be phrased
as: The laws of nature perceived by an observer are
independent of his state of motion. . . . By combining
the principle of relativity with the results of the constancy
of light in a vacuum, one arrives by a purely
deductive manner at what is called today “relativity
theory.” . . . Its signifi cance lies in the fact that it provides
conditions that every general law of nature
must satisfy, for the theory teaches that natural phenomena
are such that the laws do not depend on the
state of motion of the observer to whom the phenomena
are spatially and temporally related.
Vossische Zeitung, April 26, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 1
*A theorist goes astray in two ways:
 1. The devil leads him by the nose with a false
hypothesis. (For this he deserves our pity.)
 2. His arguments are erroneous and sloppy. (For
this he deserves a beating.)
To H. A. Lorentz, February 3, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 52
One should not pursue goals that are easily achieved.
One must develop an instinct for what one can just
barely achieve through one’s greatest efforts.
 
On Science and Mathematics 361
To former student Walter Dällenbach, May 31, 1915, while
giving him some advice on an electrical engineering project.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 87
Professionally, scientists and mathematicians are
strictly international-minded and guard carefully
against any unfriendly measures taken against their
colleagues living in hostile foreign countries. Historians
and philologists, on the other hand, are mostly
chauvinistic hotheads.
To H. A. Lorentz, August 2, 1915, on the atmosphere in Berlin,
though Einstein spoke about a specifi c mind-set in Germany
that was conditioned by historical circumstance.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 103
In my personal experience I have hardly come to
know the wretchedness of mankind better than as a
result of this theory and everything connected to it.
But it doesn’t bother me.
To Heinrich Zangger, November 26, 1915, regarding the reception
of the general theory of relativity. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 152
The theory is beautiful beyond comparison. However,
only one colleague has really been able to understand
it and [use it].
Ibid. The colleague was David Hilbert.
Hardly anyone who truly understands it will be
able to escape the charm of this theory.
 
362 The Quotations
From “Field Equations of Gravitation,” November 1915,
a paper further confi rming the general theory of relativity
by applying Riemann’s curvature tensor. CPAE, Vol. 6,
Doc. 25
Be sure you take a good look at them; they are the
most valuable discovery of my life.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, December 19, 1915, regarding the
equations in the above paper. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 161
A concept exists for a physicist only when there is a
possibility of finding out in a concrete case whether
or not the concept applies.
This sentence appears in Einstein’s popular account of relativity,
On the Special and the General Theory of Relativity (1916;
published in German in 1917) (see CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 42).
Reprinted in English in Relativity: The Special and the General
Theory. It is his comment on the assumption of the absolute
nature of simultaneity (see CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 316, n. 3).
Also quoted in a letter from Edouard Guillaume to Einstein,
February 15, 1920 (CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 316).
*No fairer destiny could be allotted to any physical
theory than that it should of itself point out the way
to the introduction of a more comprehensive theory,
in which it lives on as a limiting case.
From Relativity: The Special and the General Theory, 78
The theory of relativity is nothing but another step in
the centuries-old evolution of our science, one which
 
On Science and Mathematics 363
preserves the relationships discovered in the past,
deepening their insights and adding new ones.
From “The Principal Ideas of the Theory of Relativity,”
written after December 1916. CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 44a, embedded
in Vol. 7
The supreme task [Aufgabe] of the physicist is to arrive
at those universal elementary laws from which
the cosmos can be built up by pure deduction. There
is no logical path to these laws; only intuition, resting
on sympathetic understanding of experience,
can reach them.
From “Motives for Research,” a speech delivered at Max
Planck’s sixtieth birthday celebration, April 1918. Reprinted
in Ideas and Opinions, 226, as “Principles of Research.”
See CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 7
The state of mind which enables a man to do work
of this kind . . . is akin to that of the religious worshiper
or the lover; the daily effort comes from no
deliberate intention or program, but straight from
the heart.
Ibid., 227
In regard to his subject matter . . . the physicist has
to limit himself very severely: he must content himself
with describing the most simple events that can
be brought within the domain of our experience; all
events of a more complex order are beyond the
 
364 The Quotations
power of the human intellect to reconstruct with the
subtle accuracy and logical perfection the theoretical
physicist demands.
Ibid.
I believe with Schopenhauer that one of the strongest
motives that leads men to art and science is escape
from everyday life with its painful crudity and
hopeless dreariness, from the fetters of one’s own
ever shifting desires. . . . A fi nely tempered nature
longs to escape from personal life into the world of
objective perception and thought.
Ibid.
The mainspring of scientific thought is not an external
goal toward which one must strive, but the pleasure
of thinking.
To Heinrich Zangger, ca. August 11, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 597
For me, a hypothesis is a statement whose truth is
temporarily assumed, but whose meaning must be
beyond all doubt.
To Edward Study, September 25, 1918. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 624
Nature rarely surrenders one of her magnifi cent
secrets!
To Heinrich Zangger, June 1, 1919, regarding his further explorations
into relativity theory. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 52
 
On Science and Mathematics 365
*The quantum theory gives me a feeling very much
like yours. One really ought to be ashamed of its
success, because it has been obtained with the Jesuit
maxim: “Let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand doeth.”
To Max Born, June 4, 1919. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 10.
CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 56
Lecturing on quantum theory is not for me. Though
I have labored much with it, I have gained little insight
into it.
To Walter Dällenbach, ca. July 1, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 66
Dear Mother, Today I have some happy news.
H. A. Lorentz telegraphed me that the English expeditions
[led by Arthur Eddington] have really veri-
fi ed the defl ection of light by the sun.
To Pauline Einstein, September 27, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 113. Some writers have claimed that Arthur Eddington
fudged his data in compiling the results of his experiments.
During the eclipse expeditions to the island of
Principe that set out to prove general relativity, he threw
out two-thirds of the sixteen photographic plates that
seemed to support Newton over Einstein. Some researchers
think that the mathematical formula that Eddington
used to reach the star-beam displacement was also biased.
In time, of course, Eddington was vindicated when others
obtained better results and proved Einstein correct, anyway.
For a discussion of this subject, see Daniel Kennefick,
“Testing Relativity from the 1919 Eclipse,” Physics Today,
March 2009, 37–42.
 
366 The Quotations
The most important consequence of the special theory
of relativity concerned the inert masses of corporeal
systems. It became evident that the inertia of
a system necessarily depends on its energy content,
and this led straight to the notion that inert mass is
simply latent energy. The principle of the conservation
of mass lost its independence and became
joined with that of the conservation of energy.
From “What Is the Theory of Relativity,” written at the request
of The Times (London), November 28, 1919. CPAE,
Vol. 7, Doc. 25
When we say that we understand a group of natural
phenomena, we mean that we have found a constructive
theory that embraces them.
Ibid.
I believe that we can promote research effectively in
the area of the general theory of relativity even without
use of special public funds, if the country’s observatories
and astronomers would simply place a
portion of their equipment and labor at the service
of this cause.
To Konrad Haenisch, the German Minister of Education,
December 6, 1919, after being informed that the National
Treasury had reserved 150,000 marks to support research
in general relativity. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 194
I am convinced that the redshift of spectrum lines is
an absolutely convincing consequence of relativity
 
On Science and Mathematics 367
theory. If it were proved that this effect did not exist
in nature, then the whole theory would have to be
abandoned.
To Arthur Eddington, December 15, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 216
[A researcher] adapts to the facts by intuitive selection
of the possible theories based upon axioms.
From “Induction and Deduction in Physics,” Berliner Tageblatt,
December 25, 1919. See also CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 28
The simplest picture one can form about the creation
of an empirical science is along the lines of an
inductive method. Individual facts are selected and
grouped together such that their lawful connection
becomes clearly apparent. By grouping these laws
together, one can achieve other more general laws
until a more or less uniform system for the available
individual facts has been established. . . . However
. . . the big advances in scientific knowledge
originated this way only to a small degree. For, if a
researcher were to approach things without a preconceived
opinion, how would he be able to pick
the facts from the tremendous richness of the most
complicated experiences that are simple enough to
reveal their connections through laws?
Ibid.
The truly great advances in our understanding of
nature originated in a way almost diametrically
 
368 The Quotations
opposed to induction. The intuitive grasp of the essentials
of a large complex of facts leads the scientist
to the postulation of a hypothetical basic law, or several
such laws. From these laws, he derives his conclusions,
. . . which can then be compared to experience.
Basic laws (axioms) and conclusions together
form what is called a “theory.” Every expert knows
that the greatest advances in natural science . . .
originated in this manner, and that their basis has
this hypothetical character.
Ibid.
The truth of a theory can never be proven, for one
never knows if future experience will contradict its
conclusions.
Ibid.
When two theories are available and both are compatible
with the given arsenal of facts, then there are
no other criteria to prefer one over the other except
the intuition of the researcher. Therefore one can understand
why intelligent scientists, cognizant both
of theories and of facts, can still be passionate adherents
of opposing theories.
Ibid.
Then I would have had to pity our dear God. The
theory is correct all the same.
 
On Science and Mathematics 369
In answer to the question of doctoral student Ilse RosenthalSchneider,
in 1919, about how he would have reacted if his
general theory of relativity had not been confi rmed experimentally
that year by Arthur Eddington and Frank Dyson.
As quoted by her in Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientifi
c Truth, 74
*Why should we give preference to coordinate systems
in uniform motion? Any motion should be permissible.
What does Nature care about our reference
systems?
In ibid., 91
[Constructive theories], from a relatively simple
fundamental formalism, attempt to explain the more
complex phenomena. . . . [Theories of principle, on
the other hand,] are based on empirically discovered
general properties of natural processes, on principles
from which mathematically formulated criteria
follow and that individual processes or their theoretical
models must observe.
Einstein’s formulation of two kinds of scientifi c theories,
1919; he regarded constructive theories as more important,
though each had its advantages. “What Is the Theory of
Relativity?” CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 26
Some time will probably still have to elapse before
the [spectral] problem is completely resolved. But I
have full confidence in the relativistic idea. Once all
 
370 The Quotations
the sources of error have been eliminated (indirect
light source), it is sure to come out right.
To Paul Ehrenfest, April 7, 1920, on general relativity.
CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 371
Concepts are simply empty when they stop being
fi rmly linked to experiences. They resemble social
climbers who are ashamed of their origins and want
to deny them.
To Hans Reichenbach, June 30, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 10,
Doc. 66
This world is a remarkable house of fools. At present
every coachman and every waiter is debating
whether the relativity theory is correct. Their conviction
about that is determined by the political
party to which they belong.
To Marcel Grossmann, September 12, 1920, expressing his
surprise at the widespread interest in the theory of general
relativity. Because his theory was not understood by most
people, Einstein became an even more mysterious fi gure.
He continued to refer to the public spectacle as the “relativity
circus.” CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 148
It is my inner conviction that the development of
science seeks in the main to satisfy the longing for
pure knowledge.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein,
173
 
On Science and Mathematics 371
The word “discovery” in itself is regrettable. For
discovery is equivalent to becoming aware of a thing
which is already formed; this links up with proof,
which no longer bears the character of “discovery”
but, in the final analysis, of the means that leads to
discovery. . . . Discovery is really not a creative act.
Ibid., 95
The aspect of knowledge that has not yet been laid
bare gives the investigator a feeling akin to that experienced
by a child who seeks to grasp the masterly
way in which adults manipulate things.
Ibid., 46
*I’m now pretty much fed up with relativity! Even
such a thing wears thin when one becomes too preoccupied
with it.
To Elsa Einstein, January 8, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 12
As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality,
they are not certain; and as far as they are certain,
they do not refer to reality.
From “Geometry and Experience,” an address to the Prussian
Academy of Sciences, Berlin, January 27, 1921. In Einstein,
Sidelights on Relativity (1922; reprint, New York:
Dover, 1983), 28. (In the 1996 edition of this book, in place
of “the laws of mathematics,” I had earlier used Philipp
Frank’s word “geometry,” misquoted in Einstein: His Life
and Times, 177. Thanks to a Czech reader for the correction.)
 
372 The Quotations
One reason why mathematics enjoys special esteem,
above all other sciences, is that its laws are absolutely
certain and indisputable, while those of all
other sciences are to some extent debatable and in
constant danger of being overthrown by newly discovered
facts.
Ibid., 27
We may in fact regard [geometry] as the most ancient
branch of physics. . . . Without it I would have
been unable to formulate the theory of relativity.
Ibid., 32–33
*The Lord does it the way he wants to and will not
be dictated to.
To Arnold Sommerfeld, March 9, 1921, in presenting a supplementary
general relativity equation to him, but being
uncertain of its physical value. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 89
*No man of culture or knowledge has any animosity
toward my theories. Even the physicists opposed to
the theory are animated by political motives.
Quoted in the New York Times, April 3, 1921, 1, 13. See also
Illy, Albert Meets America, 30
*Without the discoveries of every one of the great
men of physics, those who laid down preceding laws,
relativity would have been impossible to conceive,
 
On Science and Mathematics 373
and there would have been no basis for it. . . . The
four men who laid the foundations of physics on
which I have been able to construct my theory are
Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and Lorentz.
Quoted in the New York Times, April 4, 1921, 5. See also Illy,
Albert Meets America, 41–42
*The practical man need not worry about [relativity
theory]. From the philosophical aspect, however,
it has importance, as it alters the conceptions of
time and space which are necessary to philosophical
speculations and conceptions.
Ibid.
*A clock on the periphery moves slower than a clock
at the center for an observer on the blackboard. It
must go more slowly, it has been shown, for the observer
on the disk, hence the conclusion that as soon
as a gravitational field is at hand, of which this is a
special case, then clocks at different places run at
different speeds.
From a lecture at the City College of New York, April 20,
1921. New York Times, April 21, 1921, 12. See also Illy, Albert
Meets America, 108
*Everywhere I go someone asks me that question.
It is absurd. Anyone who has had sufficient training
in science can readily understand the theory. There
is nothing amazing or mysterious about it. It is so
 
374 The Quotations
simple to minds trained along that line and there are
many such in the United States.
From an interview with the Chicago Daily Tribune, published
May 3, 1921, sec. 1, 3, in response to the question if it
is true that only twelve men can understand his theories of
relativity. See also Illy, Albert Meets America, 147
The Lord God is subtle, but malicious he is not.
Originally said in German to Princeton University mathematics
professor Oswald Veblen, May 1921, while Einstein
was in Princeton for a series of lectures, upon hearing that
an experimental result by Dayton C. Miller of Cleveland, if
true, would contradict his theory of gravitation; but the result
turned out to be false. Some say by this remark Einstein
meant that Nature hides her secrets by being subtle,
while others say he meant that Nature is mischievous but
not bent on trickery. The above translation was popularized
by Abraham Pais, but the original German word “raf-
fi niert” is diffi cult to translate. Other appropriate adjectives,
while not as pretty as “subtle,” are crafty, wily, tricky,
cunning.
Permanently inscribed in stone above the fireplace in
the faculty lounge, 202 Jones Hall (called Fine Hall until
Princeton’s new mathematics building with the same
name was constructed) as “Raffiniert ist der Herr Gott,
aber boshaft ist Er nicht” (“Herr Gott” should be “Herrgott”).
Quoted widely in various translated versions, for
example, in Pais, Subtle Is the Lord; Frank, Einstein: His Life
and Times, 285; and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and
Rebel, 146
I have second thoughts. Maybe God is malicious.
To Valentine Bargmann and Peter Bergmann, later in
Princeton, meaning that God makes us believe we have
 
On Science and Mathematics 375
understood something that in reality we are far from understanding.
See Bargmann, “Working with Einstein,”
in Some Strangeness in the Proportion, ed. Harry Woolf
(Addison-Wesley, 1980), 480–481.
Now to the term “relativity theory.” I admit that it is
unfortunate, and has given occasion to philosophical
misunderstandings.
To E. Zschimmer, September 30, 1921, referring to Max
Planck’s term for his theory, which stuck despite his unhappiness
with it. He would have preferred “theory of invariants,”
which he felt better described the method, if not
the content. See Holton, The Advancement of Science, 69, 110,
312, n. 21. Einstein Archives 24-156
*I build on Newton, I do not annul him. So, only
through misinterpretation can my theory have a
poetic significance, leading, without my intention
or permission, to misunderstandings that are construed
around it and to which it is forced to conform.
Let us no longer talk of the political concerns
or principles that some would like to connect to it.
From an interview with Aldo Sorani, Il Messagero, October
26, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Appendix G
*The insights and methods developed by science
serve practical purposes only indirectly and often
only for future generations; but if we neglect science
we will later lack the scientific workers who,
by their broad vision and judgment, are able to
 
376 The Quotations
create new niches in the economy or adapt to new
challenges.
From “The Plight of German Science,” in Neue Freie Presse
(Vienna), December 25, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 70
Relativity is a purely scientific matter and has nothing
to do with religion.
In response to the question of Randall Thomas Davidson,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, about “what effect relativity
would have on religion,” London, 1921. Quoted in Frank,
Einstein: His Life and Times, 190
*The working theoretical physicist is not to be envied,
because Mother Nature, or more precisely an
experiment, is a resolute and seldom friendly referee
of his work. She never says “yes” to a theory,
but only “maybe” under the best of circumstances,
and in most cases simply “no.” If an experiment
verifi es a theory, it is still a “maybe”; if it doesn’t, it
is a “no.”
Perhaps a play on the universal notion that when a
woman says “no” she means “maybe.” In “Theoretische
Bemerkungen zur Supraleitung der Metalle,” in Het natuurkundig
laboratorium der Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden in de jaren
1904–1922, November 11, 1922 (Leiden: Ijdo, 1922), 429.
(Thanks to József Illy for sending me this gem.)
There is always a certain charm in tracing the evolution
of theories in the original papers; often such
study offers deeper insights into the subject matter
 
On Science and Mathematics 377
than the systematic presentation of the final result,
polished by the words of many contemporaries.
From the foreword to the Japanese edition of Einstein’s papers,
written in German, dated December 12, 1922, published
May 1923
I was sitting in the patent office in Bern when all of
a sudden a thought occurred to me: if a person falls
freely, he won’t feel his own weight. I was startled.
This simple thought made a deep impression on me.
It impelled me toward a theory of gravitation.
From his Kyoto lecture, December 14, 1922. Translated into
English by Y. A. Ono in Physics Today, August 1932, from
notes taken by Yon Ishiwara.
Describing the physical laws without reference to
geometry is similar to describing our thoughts without
words.
Ibid.
The theory of relativity states: The laws of nature are
to be formulated free of any specific coordinates because
a coordinate system does not conform to anything
real. The simplicity of a hypothetical law is to
be judged only according to its generally covariant
form. . . . The laws of nature have never had and
still do not have a preferential coordinate system. . . .
The theory of relativity claims only that the general
 
378 The Quotations
laws of nature are the same with respect to any
system.
From an article in Annalen der Physik 69 (1922), 438. Einstein
Archives 1-016
*Give the boy his Ph.D. He can’t do much damage
with a Ph.D. in physics!
To Paul Langevin, ca. 1922, in urging him to accept Prince
Louis de Broglie’s doctoral dissertation claiming that matter
can be considered to have a dual particle/wave nature,
as had been established for light. Quoted in Bulent Atalay,
Math and the Mona Lisa (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Books, 2004). Thanks to Tom Gilb for sending this gem to
me, and to Atalay for sending me the book. The story may
be apocryphal even though it is widely circulated by
respected physicists, since I could not fi nd it in any of
Einstein’s letters to Langevin. The closest was a letter of
December 16, 1924 (Einstein Archives 15-377), where he
writes that de Broglie has “lifted a corner of the great veil,”
that the theory fi tted in with something he was working
on, and that he would discuss the subject with others. De
Broglie introduced his theory in notes in 1923, defended
his dissertation on November 25, 1924 (three weeks before
Einstein wrote this particular letter), and published it in
1925 in Ann. de Phys., ser. 10, vol. 3. As it turned out, the
theory was mathematically equivalent to the Heisenberg
theory, which, according to the American Institute of Physics
Web site, Einstein distrusted.
In seeking an integrated theory, the intellect cannot
rest contentedly with the assumption that there are
two distinct fields, totally independent of each other
by their nature.
 
On Science and Mathematics 379
From his delayed Nobel Lecture, written June 11, 1923, and
delivered July 1923 in Göteborg. This statement foretold
Einstein’s lifelong search for a unifi ed fi eld theory of gravity
and electromagnetism. See Les Prix Nobel en 1921–1922
(Stockholm, 1923). Einstein Archives 1-027
After a certain high level of technical skill is achieved,
science and art tend to coalesce in esthetics, plasticity,
and form. The greatest scientists are artists
as well.
Remark made in 1923. Recalled by Archibald Henderson,
Durham Morning Herald, August 21, 1955. Einstein Archives
33-257
The more one chases after quanta, the better they
hide themselves.
To Paul Ehrenfest, July 12, 1924, expressing his frustration
over quantum theory. Einstein Archives 10-089
My interest in science was always essentially limited
to the study of principles. . . . That I have published
so little is due to this same circumstance, as
the great need to grasp principles has caused me to
spend most of my time on fruitless pursuits.
To Maurice Solovine, October 30, 1924. Published in Letters
to Solovine, 63. Einstein Archives 21-195
There are those with a good nose for fundamental
physical insights [Prinzipienfuchser] and there are
those who have great technical ability [Virtuosen]. . . .
 
380 The Quotations
All three of us [Einstein, Bohr, Ehrenfest] belong to
the first kind and (at least the two of us) have little
technical talent. Thus the effect when encountering
outstanding virtuosos (Born or Debye): discouragement.
But it is similar the other way around.
To Paul Ehrenfest, September 18, 1925. Quoted in the German
edition of Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 552. Einstein Archives
10-111
Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing. But an
inner voice tells me that this is not yet the real thing.
The theory yields much, but it hardly brings us
closer to the Old One’s secrets. I, in any case, am
convinced that He does not play dice.
To Max Born, December 4, 1926. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
88. Einstein Archives 8-180. The popular version of the
last sentence is “God does not play dice with the universe.”
It is only in quantum theory that Newton’s differential
method becomes inadequate, and indeed strict
causality fails us. But the last word has not yet been
said.
Letter to the Royal Society (U.K.) on the occasion of the
Newton bicentenary, March 1927. Reprinted in Nature 119
(1927), 467. Einstein Archives 1-060
All physical theories, their mathematical expressions
notwithstanding, ought to lend themselves to
so simple a description that even a child could understand
them.
 
On Science and Mathematics 381
From a conversation in 1927; recalled by Louis de Broglie
in Nouvelles perspectives en microphysique, Paris, 1956.
(Trans. New York: Basic Books, 1962, 184.) Also in Clark,
Einstein, 344
*The best thing, which I have been pondering and
fi guring out for days on end and half the night, is
now complete before me, condensed into seven
pages and titled “A Unifi ed Field Theory.”
To Michele Besso, January 5, 1929. Translated in Neffe, Einstein,
351. Einstein Archives 7-102
I admire to the highest degree the achievement
of the younger generation of physicists which goes
by the term quantum mechanics, and believe in
the deep level of truth of that theory; but I believe
that its limitation to statistical laws will be a temporary
one.
From a speech on June 28, 1929, on acceptance of the
Planck Medal. Quoted in Forschungen und Fortschritte 5
(1929), 248–249
The main source of all technological achievements is
the divine curiosity and playful drive of the tinkering
and thoughtful researcher, as much as it is the
creative imagination of the inventor.
From a radio broadcast in Berlin opening the German
Radio Exhibition, August 22, 1930. Transcribed by Friedrich
Herneck in Die Naturwissenschaften 48 (1961), 33. Einstein
Archives 4-044
 
382 The Quotations
Those who thoughtlessly make use of the miracles of
science and technology, without understanding more
about them than a cow eating plants understands
about botany, should be ashamed of themselves.
Ibid.
*Until our era, people of different nations got to
know one another almost exclusively by way of the
distorting mirror of their own daily press. Radio
shows people to one another in a vibrant way . . .
and thereby contributes to eradicating the feeling of
mutual alienation that can easily turn to mistrust
and hostility.
Ibid.
The scientist finds his reward in what Henri Poincaré
calls the joy of comprehension, and not in the
possibilities of application to which any discovery
may lead.
From “A Socratic Dialogue,” an exchange of opinions
among Einstein, James Murphy, and J.W.N. Sullivan, probably
in 1930. As quoted in the epilogue to Planck, Where Is
Science Going? (New York, 1932), 211. Parts of the dialogue
are also in Forum and Century 83 (June 1930), 373–379,
under the title “Science and God: A Dialogue.”
A dictatorship means muzzles all round, and consequently
stultification. Science can flourish only in an
atmosphere of free speech.
 
On Science and Mathematics 383
From “Science and Dictatorship,” in Dictatorship on Its Trial,
ed. Otto Forst de Battaglia, trans. Huntley Paterson (London:
George G. Harrop, 1930), 107. This contributed essay
consists of only these two sentences. Einstein Archives
46-218
Concern for man himself and his fate must always
form the chief objective of all technological endeavors
. . . in order that the creations of our minds shall
be a blessing and not a curse to mankind. Never
forget this in the midst of your diagrams and
equations.
From an address entitled “Science and Happiness,”
presented at the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
February 16, 1931. Quoted in the New York Times,
February 17 and 22, 1931. Einstein Archives 36-320
Why does this magnificent applied science, which
saves work and makes life easier, bring us so little
happiness? The simple answer: because we have
not yet learned to make a sensible use of it.
In reference to technology. Ibid.
*The belief in an external world independent of the
perceiving subject is the basis of all natural science.
Since, however, sense perception only gives information
of this external world or of “physical reality”
indirectly, we can only grasp the latter by speculative
means. It follows from this that our notions
of physical reality can never be fi nal.
 
384 The Quotations
From “Maxwell’s Infl uence on the Evolution of the Idea of
Physical Reality,” in James Clerk Maxwell: A Commemorative
Volume (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,
1931). See also Ideas and Opinions, 266
*Thus the partial differential equation entered theoretical
physics as a handmaid but has gradually become
a mistress.
Ibid. Ideas and Opinions, 268
I believe that the present fashion of applying the axioms
of physical science to human life is not only
entirely a mistake but has also something reprehensible
about it.
On a “worldview” of relativity and the gross abuse of
physical science in areas in which it is not applicable. Ibid.;
also quoted by Loren Graham in Holton and Elkana, Albert
Einstein: Historical and Cultural Perspectives, 107
*Science as something already in existence, already
completed, is the most objective, impersonal thing
that we humans know. Science as something coming
into being, as a goal, is just as subjectively, psychologically
conditioned as are all other human
endeavors.
From an address to students at UCLA, February 1932. In
Builders of the Universe (Los Angeles: U.S. Library Association,
1932), 91
*It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of
all theory is to make the irreducible basic elements
 
On Science and Mathematics 385
as simple and as few as possible without having to
surrender the adequate representation of a single
datum of experience.
From “On the Method of Theoretical Physics,” the Herbert
Spencer Lecture, Oxford, June 10, 1933. This is the Oxford
University Press version. The words “simple,” “simplest,”
and “simplicity” recur throughout the lecture. The version
reprinted in 1954 in Ideas and Opinions, 272, is a bit different.
This sentence may be the origin of the much-quoted
sentence that “everything should be as simple as possible,
but not simpler,” and its variants. The latter version, which
appears in the July 1977 issue of Reader’s Digest, of course
can’t be taken literally. The October 1938 Reader’s Digest article
with the word “simplicity” in its title uses the word
only to describe Einstein as a human being. This article, incidentally,
is full of biographical errors.
*Our experience hitherto justifies us in believing
that nature is the realization of the simplest conceivable
mathematical ideas. I am convinced that we
can discover by means of purely mathematical constructions
the concepts and the laws connecting
them with each other, which furnish the key to the
understanding of natural phenomena.
Ibid. Ideas and Opinions, 274
The creative principle [of science] resides in
mathematics.
Ibid.
The years of anxious searching in the dark for a
truth that one feels but cannot express, the intense
 
386 The Quotations
desire and the alternations of confidence and misgiving
until one achieves clarity and understanding,
can be understood only by those who have experienced
them.
From a lecture at the University of Glasgow, June 20, 1933.
Published in The Origins of the Theory of Relativity; reprinted
in Mein Weltbild, 138; and in Ideas and Opinions, 289–290
It is not the result of scientific research that ennobles
humans and enriches their nature, but the struggle to
understand while performing creative and openminded
intellectual work.
From “Good and Evil,” 1933. Published in Mein Weltbild
(1934), 14; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 12
*He [a mathematician] has shown little psychological
insight. Mathematicians are often so. They think
logically, but they lack an organic connection.
To Stephen Wise, June 9, 1934. Einstein Archives 35-150
*The idea that there exist two structures of space independent
of each other, the metric-gravitational
fi eld and the electromagnetic, [is] intolerable to the
theoretical spirit. We are prompted to the belief that
both sorts of fields must correspond to a unifi ed
structure of space.
From “The Problem of Space, Ether, and the Field in Physics,”
in Essays in Science (1934), 74. Also in Ideas and Opinions,
285
 
On Science and Mathematics 387
[The likelihood of transforming matter into energy]
is something like shooting birds in the dark in a
country where there are only a few birds.
Remark at a January 1935 press conference, three years before
the atom was successfully split to cause fi ssion.
Quoted in Literary Digest, January 12, 1935. Also quoted in
Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 290, which warns
that the account should be regarded with caution.
I myself have only little motivation to write general
things because I feel a strong alienation from
the generation with which I will share the rest of
my days. I would rather bury myself in contemplating
basic scientific problems, particularly those
that in my opinion currently strongly deviate from
prevailing work. I don’t think one will establish
physics successfully using fundamental statistical
foundations.
To Bertrand Russell, January 27, 1935. Einstein Archives
33-161
The general public may be able to follow the details
of scientific research to only a modest degree; but it
can register at least one great and important notion:
the confidence that human thought is dependable
and natural law is universal.
From “Science and Society,” 1935. Reprinted in Einstein on
Humanism, 13. Einstein Archives 28-342
 
388 The Quotations
Scientifi c research is based on the assumption that
all events, including the actions of mankind, are determined
by the laws of nature.
To Phyllis Wright, January 24, 1936. Einstein Archives
52-337
All of science is nothing more than the refinement of
everyday thinking.
From “Physics and Reality,” Journal of the Franklin Institute
221, no. 3 (March 1936), 349–382. Reprinted in Ideas and
Opinions, 290
The aim of science is, on the one hand, a comprehension,
as complete as possible, of the connection between
the sense experiences in their totality, and,
on the other hand, the accomplishment of this aim
by the use of a minimum of primary concepts and
relations.
Ibid., 293
It is always a blessing when a great and beautiful
conception is proven to be in harmony with reality.
To Sigmund Freud, April 21, 1936, on Freud’s ideas. Einstein
Archives 32-566
We (Mr. Rosen and I) sent our publication to you
without the authorization that you may show it to
other specialists before it is printed. I do not see any
 
On Science and Mathematics 389
reason to follow your anonymous reviewer’s recommendations
(which incidentally are erroneous).
In view of the foregoing, I will consider having the
work published elsewhere.
To the editor of the Physical Review, July 27, 1936. The article,
“On Gravitational Waves,” with Nathan Rosen, was
later published in the Journal of the Franklin Institute 223
(1937), 43–54. Einstein Archives 19-087
I still struggle with the same problems as ten years
ago. I succeed in small matters but the real goal remains
unattainable, even though it sometimes seems
palpably close. It is hard yet rewarding: hard because
the goal is beyond my abilities, but rewarding
because it makes one oblivious to the distractions of
everyday life.
To Otto Juliusburger, September 28, 1937. Einstein Archives
38-163
*I’m still working passionately, though most of my
intellectual off-spring are ending up prematurely in
the cemetery of disappointed hopes.
To Heinrich Zangger, February 27, 1938. Einstein Archives
40-105
Physical concepts are free creations of the human
mind and are not, however it may seem, uniquely
determined by the external world.
From The Evolution of Physics, with Leopold Infeld (1938)
 
390 The Quotations
*According to the theory of relativity, there is no essential
distinction between mass and energy. Energy
has mass and mass represents energy. Instead of
two conservation laws, we have only one, that of
mass-energy.
Ibid., 208
*Without the belief that it is possible to grasp reality
with our theoretical constructions, without the belief
in the inner harmony of our world, there could
be no science. This belief is and always will remain
the fundamental motive for all scientifi c creation.
Ibid., 313
*The results gained thus far concerning the splitting
of the atom do not justify the assumption that the
atomic energy released in the process could be economically
utilized. Yet, there can hardly be a physicist
with so little intellectual curiosity that his interest
in this important subject could become impaired
because of the unfavorable conclusion to be drawn
from past experimentation.
Statement for the New York Times, March 14, 1939. See
Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer, 45
*Science is the attempt to make the chaotic diversity
of our sense-experience correspond to a logically
uniform system of thought. In this system, single
experiences must be correlated with the theoretic
 
On Science and Mathematics 391
structure in such a way that the resulting coordination
is unique and convincing. . . . The sense experiences
are the given subject matter, but the theory
that shall interpret them is man-made. It is . . . hypothetical,
never completely final, always subject to
question and doubt.
From “The Fundamentals of Theoretical Physics,” Science
91 (May 24, 1940), 487–492. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions,
323–335
What we call physics comprises that group of natural
sciences which base their concepts on measurements,
and whose concepts and propositions lend
themselves to mathematical formulations.
Ibid.
There has always been an attempt to find a unifying
theoretical basis for all these [various branches of
physics] . . . from which all the concepts and relationships
among the individual disciplines might be
derived by a logical process. This is what we mean
by the search for a foundation of the whole of physics.
The confident belief that this ultimate goal may
be reached is the wellspring of the passionate devotion
that has always motivated the researcher.
Ibid.
You cannot love a car the way you love a horse. The
horse, unlike a machine, compels human emotions.
 
392 The Quotations
A machine disregards human feelings. . . . Machines
make our life impersonal, stunt certain qualities in
us, and create an impersonal environment.
From a conversation recorded by Algernon Black, Fall
1940. Einstein forbade the publication of this conversation.
Einstein Archives 54-834
Although it is true that it is the goal of science to
discover rules which permit the association and
foretelling of facts, this is not its only aim. It also
seeks to reduce the connections discovered to the
smallest possible number of mutually independent
conceptual elements. It is in this striving after the
rational unification of the manifold that it encounters
its greatest successes.
From “Science, Philosophy and Religion,” a symposium
published by the Conference on Science, Philosophy
and Religion in Their Relation to the Democratic Way
of Life, New York, 1941. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions,
48–49
*The supernational character of scientific concepts
and scientific language is due to the fact that they
have been set up by the best brains of all countries
and all times. . . . They created the spiritual tools for
the technical revolution which has transformed the
life of mankind in the last century.
From “The Common Language of Science,” Advancement of
Science 2, no. 5 (1941), 109–110. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions,
336–337
 
On Science and Mathematics 393
It is hard to sneak a look at God’s cards. But that he
would choose to play dice with the world . . . is
something I cannot believe for a single moment.
To Cornel Lanczos, March 21, 1942, expressing his reaction
to quantum theory, which refutes relativity theory by stating
that an observer can infl uence reality, that events do
happen randomly. Quoted in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein:
Creator and Rebel, chapter 10; Frank, Einstein: His Life and
Times, 208, 285; and Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 114. Einstein
Archives 15-294. My favorite variant of this quotation, sent
to me by a rabbi, is: “God doesn’t play craps with the universe.”
Physicist Niels Bohr is said to have told Einstein,
“Stop telling God what to do!”
I never understood why the theory of relativity, with
its concepts and problems so far removed from
practical life, should have met with such a lively, indeed
passionate, reception among a broad segment
of the public.
Written in October 1942. Published in foreword to Frank,
Einstein: Sein Leben und seine Zeit, 1979 German edition
*We have become Antipodean in our scientific expectations.
You believe in the God who plays dice,
and I in complete law and order in a world which
objectively exists. . . . I fi rmly believe, but I hope that
someone will discover a more realistic way, or rather
a more tangible basis than has been my lot to fi nd.
Even the great initial success of the quantum theory
does not make me believe in the fundamental dicegame,
although I am well aware that our younger
 
394 The Quotations
colleagues interpret this to be a consequence of
senility.
To Max Born, September 7, 1944. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
146. Einstein Archives 8-207
*A knowledge of the historic and philosophical
background [of science] gives . . . independence
from prejudices . . . from which most scientists are
suffering. This independence created by philosophical
insight is—in my opinion—the mark of distinction
between a mere artisan or specialist and a real
seeker after truth.
To Robert Thornton, December 7, 1944. Einstein Archives
56-283
The entire history of physics since Galileo bears witness
to the importance of the function of the theoretical
physicist, from whom the basic theoretical
ideas originate. A priori construction in physics is as
essential as empirical facts.
From a memo written with Hermann Weyl to the faculty of
the Institute for Advanced Study, early 1945, recommending
theoretician Wolfgang Pauli over Robert Oppenheimer for a
professorship at the Institute. Pauli declined the offer, and
Oppenheimer, who was offered the directorship in 1946, accepted.
Quoted in Regis, Who Got Einstein’s Office?, 135
The theory of relativity, as I developed it originally,
still does not explain atomism and the quantum
phenomena. And neither does it include a common
 
On Science and Mathematics 395
mathematical formulation covering the phenomena
of both the electromagnetic and gravitational fi elds.
This demonstrates that the original formulation of
the theory of relativity is not definitive . . . its means
of expression are in process of evolution. . . . The
task to which I am now giving my greatest efforts is
to resolve the dualism between the theories of gravitation
and electromagnetism, and to reduce them to
the one and same mathematical form.
From an interview with Alfred Stern, Contemporary Jewish
Record 8 (June 1945), 245–249
I am not a positivist. Positivism states that what cannot
be observed does not exist. This conception is
scientifi cally indefensible, for it is impossible to
make valid affirmations of what people “can” or
“cannot” observe. One would have to say “only
what we observe exists,” which is obviously false.
Ibid.
I sold myself body and soul to Science—a fl ight
from the “I” and “we” to the “it.”
To Hermann Broch, September 2, 1945. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 254. Einstein Archives
34-048.1
A scientifi c person will never understand why he
should believe opinions only because they are written
in a certain book. [Furthermore], he will never
 
396 The Quotations
believe that the results of his own attempts are
fi nal.
To J. Lee, September 10, 1945. Einstein Archives 57-061
*A theory which in its fundamental equations explicitly
contains a non-basic constant would have
to be somehow constructed from bits and pieces
which are logically independent of each other; but
I am confident that this world is not such that
so ugly a construction is needed for its theoretical
comprehension.
To Ilse Rosenthal-Schneider, October 13, 1945. From a long
exchange with his former Berlin student about the universal
constants of nature and how they relate to reality. See
Rosenthal-Schneider, Reality and Scientifi c Truth, 32–38. Einstein
Archives 20-278. In a letter of April 23, 1949, he tells
her that his remarks were not categorical assertions but
conjectures grounded on intuition (ibid., p. 40).
One can organize to apply a discovery already
made, but not to make one. Only a free individual
can make a discovery. . . . Can you imagine an organization
of scientists making the discoveries of
Darwin?
From an interview with Raymond Swing, “Einstein on the
Atomic Bomb,” part 1, Atlantic Monthly, November 1945
As a scientist, I believe that nature is a perfect structure,
seen from the standpoint of reason and logical
analysis.
 
On Science and Mathematics 397
To Raymond Benenson, January 31, 1946. Einstein Archives
56-505
I believe that the abominable deterioration of ethical
standards stems primarily from the mechanization
and depersonalization of our lives—a disastrous byproduct
of science and technology. Nostra culpa!
To Otto Juliusburger, April 11, 1946. Einstein Archives
38-228
In the beginning (if there was such a thing), God
created Newton’s laws of motion together with
the necessary masses and forces. This is all; everything
beyond this follows from the development
of appropriate mathematical methods by means of
deduction.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 19
A theory is the more impressive the greater the simplicity
of its premises, the more different kinds of
things it relates, and the more extended its area of
applicability.
Ibid., 33. Einstein often refers to the value of simple hypotheses,
believing they may become basic traits of future
theoretical representations, as in the case of the emission
and absorption of radiation. See CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 34; see
also what may be a bad paraphrase of this general idea, the
quotation on simplicity in “Attributed to Einstein” at the
back of the book, and the note on the June 10, 1933, quotation
above.
 
398 The Quotations
[Classical thermodynamics] is the only physical theory
of universal content that I am convinced, within
the framework of its basic concepts, will never be
overthrown.
Ibid.
The pair Faraday-Maxwell has a most remarkable
inner similarity with the pair Galileo-Newton—the
former of each pair grasping the relations intuitively,
and the second one formulating those relations exactly
and applying them quantitatively.
Ibid., 35
*Even scholars of audacious spirit and fine instinct
can be obstructed in the interpretation of facts by
philosophical prejudices. The prejudice . . . consists
in the faith that facts by themselves can and should
yield scientific knowledge without free conceptual
construction.
Ibid., 49
*Nature is constituted so that it is possible logically
to lay down such strongly determined laws that
within these laws only rationally, completely determined
constants occur (not constants, therefore,
whose numerical value could be changed without
destroying the theory).
Ibid., 63
 
On Science and Mathematics 399
Physics is an attempt conceptually to grasp reality
as something that is considered to be independent
of its being observed. In this sense one speaks of
“physical reality.”
Ibid., 81
Equations of such complexity as are the equations of
the gravitational field can be found only through
the discovery of a logically simple mathematical
condition that determines the equations completely
or at least almost completely.
Ibid., 89
Science will stagnate if it is made to serve practical
goals.
In answer to a question posed by the Overseas News
Agency, January 20, 1947. Quoted in Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 402. Einstein Archives 28-733
*In truth, I never believed that the foundations of
physics could consist of laws of a statistical nature.
Unpublished draft comment on Max Born’s essay “Einstein’s
Statistical Theories” for Schilpp, Albert Einstein:
Philosopher-Scientist, March 1947. Quoted in Stachel, Einstein
from B to Z, 390. Einstein Archives 2-027
If God had been satisfied with inertial systems, he
would not have created gravitation.
Said to Abraham Pais, 1947. See Pais, A Tale of Two Continents,
227
 
400 The Quotations
I believe that this is the God-given generalization of
general relativity theory. Unfortunately, the Devil
comes into play, since one cannot solve the [new]
equations.
On his most recent efforts to generalize general relativity to
a so-called unifi ed fi eld theory. Ibid.
I do not like it when it can be done this way or that
way. It should be: This way or not at all.
On theories in general. Ibid.
*Anything we say about the real world must be, by
necessity, hypothetical and a construction of the
human mind. For what is immediately given to us
are only sense perceptions. . . . As always, the conception
of the existence of the real world is fundamental
in physics. Without it there would be no borderline
between psychology and physics. . . . Modern
developments have changed nothing in this respect.
To David Holland, June 25, 1948. Einstein Archives 9-305
*It is of great importance that the general public be
given an opportunity to experience—consciously
and intelligently—the efforts and results of scientifi c
research. It is not sufficient that each result be taken
up, elaborated, and applied by a few specialists in
the field. Restricting the body of knowledge to a
small group deadens the philosophical spirit of a
people and leads to spiritual poverty.
 
On Science and Mathematics 401
From the foreword of September 10, 1948, to Lincoln Barnett’s
The Universe and Dr. Einstein (2d rev. ed. New York:
Bantam, 1957), 9
*Mathematics is a useful tool for social science. In
the actual solution of social problems, however,
goals and intentions are the dominant factors.
From an interview with Milton James for the Cheyney Record,
the student newspaper of Cheyney State Teachers
College in Pennsylvania, October 7, 1948, in answer to the
question asking if mathematics can be a useful tool in solving
social problems. Einstein Archives 58-013 to 58-015
In my scientific work, I am still hampered by the
same mathematical difficulties that have been making
it impossible for me to confirm or refute my general
relativistic field theory. . . . I won’t ever solve it;
it will be forgotten and must later be rediscovered
again.
To Maurice Solovine, November 25, 1948. Published in Letters
to Solovine, 105, 107. Einstein Archives 21-256, 80-865
*I believe the method of quantum mechanics is not a
satisfactory one in principle. Yet . . . I in no way want
to deny that this theory represents a significant, in a
sense definitive progress of physical knowledge. . . .
The foundation will be consolidated or replaced by
a more comprehensive one.
From “Quantum Mechanics and Reality,” Dialectica, 1948.
Einstein Archives 1-151
 
402 The Quotations
I have little patience for scientists who take a board
of wood, look for its thinnest part, and drill a great
number of holes when the drilling is easy.
Recalled by Philipp Frank in “Einstein’s Philosophy of Science,”
Reviews of Modern Physics 21, no. 3 (July 1949):
349–355
The grand aim of all science is to cover the greatest
number of empirical facts by logical deduction from
the smallest number of hypotheses or axioms.
Quoted in Lincoln Barnett, “The Meaning of Einstein’s
New Theory,” Life magazine, January 9, 1950
*Time and again the passion for understanding has
led to the illusion that man is able to comprehend
the objective world rationally by pure thought without
any empirical foundations—in short, by metaphysics.
I believe that every true theorist is a kind of
tamed metaphysicist, no matter how pure a “positivist”
he may fancy himself to be.
From “On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation,” Scientifi
c American 182, no. 4 (April 1950). See Ideas and Opinions,
342. Einstein Archives 1-155
*According to general relativity, the concept of space
detached from any physical content does not exist.
The physical reality of space is represented by a fi eld
whose components are continuous functions of four
 
On Science and Mathematics 403
independent variables—the coordinates of space
and time.
Ibid., 348
*It is the very essence of our striving for understanding
that, on the one hand, it attempts to encompass
the great and complex variety of man’s experience
and, on the other, it looks for simplicity and economy
in the basic assumptions. The belief that these
two objectives can go side by side is, in view of the
primitive state of our scientific knowledge, a matter
of faith. Without such faith, I could not have a strong
and unshakable conviction about the independent
value of knowledge.
From “Message to the Italian Society for the Advancement
of Science,” Impact (UNESCO), Autumn 1950. See also Ideas
and Opinions, 357
One may not conclude that the “beginning of the expansion”
[of the universe] must mean a singularity in
the mathematical sense. All we have to realize is that
the [field] equations may not be continued over such
regions [of very high density of field and of matter].
This consideration does, however, not alter the fact
that the “beginning of the world” really constitutes a
beginning, from the point of view of the development
of the now existing stars and systems of stars.
From “Appendix for the Second Edition,” in The Meaning of
Relativity (1950), 129
 
404 The Quotations
The unified field theory has been put into retirement.
It is so difficult to employ mathematically that I have
not been able to verify it somehow, in spite of all my
efforts. This state of affairs will no doubt last many
more years, mostly because physicists have little understanding
of logical-philosophical arguments.
To Maurice Solovine, February 12, 1951. Published in Letters
to Solovine, 123. Einstein Archives 21-277
Science is a wonderful thing if one does not have to
earn a living at it. One should earn one’s living by
work of which one is sure one is capable. Only when
we do not have to be accountable to anyone can we
fi nd joy in scientifi c endeavor.
To California student, E. Holzapfel, March 1951. Quoted in
Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 57.
Einstein Archives 59-1013
The betterment of conditions the world over is not
strictly dependent on scientific knowledge but on
the fulfi llment of human traditions and ideals.
To John Cranston, May 16, 1951. Einstein Archives 60-821
One thing I have learned in a long life: that all our
science, measured against reality, is primitive and
childlike—and yet it is the most precious thing
we have.
To Hans Muehsam, July 9, 1951. Einstein Archives 38-408
 
On Science and Mathematics 405
There is something like a Puritan’s restraint in the
scientist who seeks truth: he keeps away from everything
voluntaristic or emotional.
From the foreword in Philipp Frank, Relativity: A Richer Truth
(London: Jonathan Cape, 1951), 9. Einstein Archives 1-160
Development of Western science is based on two
great achievements: the invention of the formal logical
system (in Euclidean geometry) by the Greek
philosophers, and the discovery of the possibility of
fi nding out causal relationships by systematic experiment
(during the Renaissance).
To J. S. Switzer, April 23, 1953. Einstein Archives 61-381
That no one can make a definite statement about
[the unified field theory’s] confirmation or noncon-
fi rmation results from the fact that there are no
methods of affirming anything with respect to solutions
that do not yield to the peculiarities of such a
complicated nonlinear system of equations. It is
even possible that no one will ever know.
To Maurice Solovine, May 28, 1953. Published in Letters to
Solovine, 149. Einstein Archives 21-300
In striving to do scientific work, the chance—even
for very gifted persons—to achieve something of
real value is very small. . . . There is only one way
out: devote most of your time to some practical
work . . . that agrees with your nature, and spend
 
406 The Quotations
the rest of it in study. So you will be able . . . to lead
a normal and harmonious life even without the special
blessings of the Muses.
To R. Bedi in India who was unsure about what lifework to
pursue, July 28, 1953. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 59. Einstein Archives 59-180
Now the scientists are bombarding me with questions
about my new theory. . . . For two months my
colleagues have been jumping on it, each trying to
improve on it. But I’m absolutely convinced that it
can’t be tampered with anymore. I’ve worked on this
theory for a long time to come up with this result.
Said after his latest equations for a unifi ed fi eld theory
were published as an appendix to the fourth edition of The
Meaning of Relativity. Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations
with Einstein,” October 16, 1953
*It is possible that there are human emanations of
which we are ignorant. You remember how skeptical
everyone was about electric currents and invisible
waves? Science is still in its infancy.
In a conversation before 1954. Recalled by Antonina Vallentin,
The Drama of Albert Einstein (New York: Doubleday,
1954), 155
It is strange that science, which in the old days
seemed harmless, should have evolved into a nightmare
that causes everyone to tremble.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 28, 1954; quoted in
Whitrow, Einstein, 89. Einstein Archives 32-410
 
On Science and Mathematics 407
There is no doubt that the special theory of relativity,
if we look at its development in retrospect, was
ripe for discovery in 1905.
To Carl Seelig, February 19, 1955. Einstein Archives 39-069
It appears doubtful that a [classical] field theory can
account for the atomistic structure of matter and radiation
as well as of quantum phenomena. Most physicists
will reply with a firm “no,” since they believe
that the quantum problem has been solved in principle
by other means. However that may be, Lessing’s
comforting words stay with us: “The struggle for
truth is more precious than its assured possession.”
Einstein’s fi nal written scientifi c words, on quantum theory,
March 1955, about a month before his death. Written
for Schweizerische Hochschulzeitung; reprinted in Seelig,
Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit; also quoted by Pais in French, Einstein:
A Centenary Volume, 37. Einstein Archives 1-205
*Since the mathematicians have invaded the theory
of relativity, I do not understand it myself anymore.
Obviously said tongue-in-cheek. Quoted by Carl Seelig, in
Albert Einstein (Zurich: Europa-Verlag, 1960), 46
When I am judging a theory, I ask myself whether, if
I were God, I would have arranged the world in
such a way.
Said to his assistant Banesh Hoffmann. See Harry Woolf,
ed., Some Strangeness in the Proportion (Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1980), 476
 
408 The Quotations
Men really devoted to the progress of knowledge
concerning the physical world . . . never worked for
practical, let alone military, goals.
Ibid., 510
I have thought a hundred times as much about the
quantum problems as I have about general relativity
theory.
As recalled by Otto Stern. Quoted by Pais in French, Einstein:
A Centenary Volume, 37
I can, if the worse comes to worst, still realize that
God may have created a world in which there are no
natural laws. In short, chaos. But that there should
be statistical laws with definite solutions, i.e., laws
that compel God to throw dice in each individual
case, I fi nd highly disagreeable.
As recalled by James Franck. Quoted by C. P. Snow in
French, Einstein: A Centenary Volume, 6
It follows from the theory of relativity that mass and
energy are both different manifestations of the same
thing—a somewhat unfamiliar conception for the
average man. Furthermore, E  mc2, in which energy
is put equal to mass multiplied with the square
of the velocity of light, showed that a very small
amount of mass may be converted into a very large
amount of energy . . . the mass and energy in fact
were equivalent.
 
On Science and Mathematics 409
Read out loud to an audience; fi lmed and shown in Nova’s
Einstein biography on PBS television, 1979
Physics is essentially an intuitive and concrete science.
Mathematics is only a means for expressing
the laws that govern phenomena.
Quoted by Maurice Solovine in “Introduction” to Letters to
Solovine, 7–8
An hour sitting with a pretty girl on a park bench
passes like a minute, but a minute sitting on a hot
stove seems like an hour.
Einstein’s explanation of relativity that he gave to his secretary,
Helen Dukas, to relay to reporters and other laypersons.
Quoted in Sayen, Einstein in America, 130
It would be possible to describe everything scientifically,
but it would make no sense. It would
be a description without meaning—as if you described
a Beethoven symphony as a variation of
wave pressure.
Quoted in Max Born, Physik im Wandel meiner Zeit (Braunschweig:
Vieweg, 1966)
A scientist is a mimosa when he himself has made a
mistake, and a roaring lion when he discovers a
mistake of others.
Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 45
 
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects
 
 
Abortion
A woman should be able to choose to have an abortion
up to a certain point in pregnancy.
To the World League for Sexual Reform, Berlin, September 6,
1929. Quoted in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 305.
Einstein Archives 48-304
Achievement
The value of achievement lies in the achieving.
To D. Liberson, October 28, 1950. Einstein Archives 60-297
Ambition
Nothing truly valuable arises from ambition or from
a mere sense of duty; it stems rather from love and
devotion toward men and toward objective things.
To F. S. Wada, an Idaho farmer who requested some words
that his son, Albert Wada, could live by as he grew up,
July 30, 1947. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein,
the Human Side, 46. Einstein Archives 58-934
Animals/Pets
*The love of living creatures is for me the finest and
best trait of mankind.
 
414 The Quotations
To Valentine Bulgakov, November 4, 1931. Einstein Archives
45-702
Thank you very much for your kind and interesting
information. I am sending my heartiest greetings to
my namesake, also from our tomcat, who was very
interested in the story and even a little jealous. The
reason is that his own name, “Tiger,” does not express,
as in your case, the close kinship to the Einstein
family.
To Edward Moses, August 10, 1946, after learning that his
ship’s crew had rescued a kitten in Germany and named it
Einstein. Einstein Archives 57-194
Dr. Dean established that Bibo—the parrot—has a
parrot sickness, and that my illness has been due to
an infection from him. . . . The poor bird will need
thirteen injections—he won’t survive them. . . .
[Later] Bibo needed only two injections and he is
quite happy about it; maybe he’ll survive, after all.
Quoted by Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” February
20 and March 4, 1955. Bibo was a seventy-fi fth birthday
gift from some admirers the preceding year. He had arrived
by post in a box like an ordinary piece of mail, and
Einstein took immediate pity on him, for days helping to
ease his trauma by trying to cheer him up. The Einsteins
had another bird named Bibo, or “Biebchen,” while living
in Germany.
I know what’s wrong, dear fellow, but I don’t know
how to turn it off.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 415
To his tomcat, Tiger, who seemed depressed because he
was housebound due to rain. Recalled by Ernst Straus in
his memorial talk, “Albert Einstein, the Man,” at UCLA,
May 1955, 14–15
The main thing is that he knows.
About a friend’s dog, Moses, whose long fur made it diffi -
cult to tell one end from the other. From an interview, January
15, 1979, with Margot Einstein by J. Sayen; quoted in
Sayen, Einstein in America, 131
The dog is very smart. He feels sorry for me because
I receive so much mail; that’s why he tries to bite the
mailman.
Regarding his dog, Chico. Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 162
Art and Science
Where the world ceases to be the scene of our personal
hopes and wishes, where we face it as free beings,
admiring, questioning, and observing, there
we enter the realm of art and science. We do science
when we reconstruct in the language of logic what
we have seen and experienced; we do art when we
communicate through forms whose connections are
not accessible to the conscious mind yet we intuitively
recognize them as something meaningful.
For a magazine on modern art, Menschen. Zeitschrift neuer
Kunst 4 (February 1921), 19. See also CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 51
 
416 The Quotations
Astrology
The reader should note [Kepler’s] remarks on astrology.
They show that the inner enemy, conquered
and rendered innocuous, was not yet completely
dead.
From “Introduction” in Johannes Kepler: Life and Letters by
Carola Baumgardt (New York: Philosophical Library, 1951).
See also “Attributed to Einstein” at the back of the book,
with a source that refutes the allegation that Einstein believed
in astrology.
Birth Control
I am convinced that some political and social activities
and practices of the Catholic organizations are
detrimental and even dangerous for the community
as a whole, here and everywhere. I mention here
only the fight against birth control at a time when
overpopulation in various countries has become a
serious threat to the health of people and a grave
obstacle to any attempt to organize peace on this
planet.
To a reader of the Brooklyn Tablet, the newspaper of the diocese
of Brooklyn and Queens, 1954, who questioned Einstein
about whether he had been correctly quoted on the
subject
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 417
Birthdays
My dear little sweetheart . . . first, my belated cordial
congratulations on your birthday yesterday,
which I had forgotten once again.
To girlfriend Mileva Mari´c, his future wife, December 19,
1901. CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 130
My birthday affords me the welcome opportunity to
express my feelings of deep gratitude for the ideal
working and living conditions which have been
placed at my disposal in the United States.
From a statement issued on his sixtieth birthday. Science 89,
n.s. (1939), 242
What is there to celebrate? Birthdays are automatic
things. Anyway, birthdays are for children.
From an interview, New York Times, March 12, 1944
My birthday was a natural disaster, a shower of paper,
full of flattery, under which one almost drowned.
To Hans Muehsam, March 30, 1954, on Einstein’s seventy-
fi fth birthday. Einstein Archives 38-434
Books
What I have to say about this book can be found inside
the book.
 
418 The Quotations
Reply to a New York Times reporter’s request for a comment
on Einstein’s book The Evolution of Physics, written with
Leopold Infeld. Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 65
I am reading Dostoyevsky (The Brothers Karamazov).
It’s the most wonderful thing that has ever fallen
into my hands.
To Heinrich Zangger, March 26, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 361
I am in raptures about The Brothers Karamazov. It is the
most wonderful book I have ever put my hands on.
To Paul Ehrenfest, April 7, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 371
Causality
The causal way of looking at things always answers
only the question, “Why?” but never “To what
end?” . . . However, if someone asks, “For what purpose
should we help one another, make life easier
for each other, make beautiful music together, have
inspired thoughts?” he would have to be told, “If
you don’t feel the reasons, no one can explain them
to you.” Without this primary feeling we are nothing
and had better not live at all.
To Hedwig Born, August 31, 1919. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 97
I believe that whatever we do or live for has its causality.
It is good, however, that we do not know what
it is.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 419
From a conversation with Indian mystic, poet, and musician
Rabindranath Tagore in Berlin, August 19, 1930. Published
in Asia 31 (March 1931)
China and the Chinese
*I would imagine life among the Chinese to be actually
quite fine and attractive. I found the few exemplars
I met extraordinarily appealing. From the
human point of view these people, in their finely
proportioned shapes, actually seem to be far superior
to us.
To Franz Rusch, who was teaching in Tientsin and felt
lonely, March 18, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 105
*As to Chinese youths, I believe that they are bound
to make great contributions to science in the future.
From an address at a reception in Shanghai at the residence
of Wang Yiting, November 13, 1922. Quoted in Hu, China
and Albert Einstein, 72
*Outwardly, the Chinese attract attention by their
industry, the small demands of their lifestyles, and
their abundance of children. . . . Yet to a large extent
they are a burdened people, cracking stones day
after day and carrying them for pennies. They seem
to be too stolid to recognize the horror of their lot. . . .
In Shanghai, the Europeans are the master class and
the Chinese their servants. . . . They appear not in
 
420 The Quotations
any way connected to their great intellectual history.
As good-natured laborers they are appreciated by
the Europeans, to whom as such they are far inferior
intellectually.
From his Travel Diary, December 31, 1922, and January 1,
1923. Einstein Archives 29-131
Christmas
*Christmas is the festival of peace. Every year it
comes in its own good time. But peace inside and
among us can come only through persistent effort.
This holiday reminds us that all people yearn for
peace. Every year it admonishes us to be vigilant
against the enemies of peace that lurk inside all of
us, lest they cause harm not only at Christmastime
but throughout the year.
From a Christmas message for an international radio
broadcast, November 28, 1948. Einstein Archives 28-850
Clarity
All my life I have been a friend of well-chosen, sober
words and of concise presentation. Pompous phrases
and words give me goose bumps whether they deal
with the theory of relativity or with anything else.
Quoted in Berliner Tageblatt, August 27, 1920, 1–2. See also
CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 45
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 421
Class
The distinctions separating the social classes are
false, in the last analysis they rest on force.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930),
193–194
Clothes
If I were to start taking care of my grooming, I would
no longer be my own self. . . . So the hell with it. If
you find me so repulsive, then look for a boyfriend
who is more appealing to female tastes. But I will
continue to be unconcerned about it, which surely
has the advantage that I’m left in peace by many a
fop who would otherwise come to see me.
To future second wife, Elsa Löwenthal, ca. December 2,
1913. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 489
Only a certain regimen regarding attire, etc., so as
not to be counted among the rejects of the local
human race, disturbs my peace of mind somewhat.
To the Hurwitz family, May 4, 1914, on his new life in Berlin.
CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 6
*If they want to see me, here I am. If they want to see
my clothes, open my closet.
Said to Elsa after she suggested he change his clothes
before receiving a delegation of visitors from German
 
422 The Quotations
president von Hindenburg, 1932. Quoted in Brian, Einstein,
a Life, 235
I like neither new clothes nor new kinds of food.
Quoted in Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, 16
“Why should I? Everyone knows me there” (upon
being told by his wife to dress properly when going
to the office). “Why should I? No one knows me
there” (upon being told to dress properly for his fi rst
big conference).
Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 87
I have reached an age when, if someone tells me to
wear socks, I don’t have to.
Quoted by neighbor and fellow physicist Allen Shenstone,
in Sayen, Einstein in America, 69
When I was young I found out that the big toe always
ends up making a hole in a sock. So I stopped
wearing socks.
Recalled by Philippe Halsman, 1947. Quoted in French,
Einstein: A Centenary Volume, 27
Competition
I no longer need to take part in the competition
of the big brains. Participating [in the process] has
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 423
always seemed to me to be an awful type of slavery
no less evil than the passion for money or power.
To Paul Ehrenfest, May 5, 1927, regarding the rat race for
academic promotions. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 60. Einstein Archives 10-163
Comprehensibility
The eternal mystery of the world is its comprehensibility.
. . . The fact that it is comprehensible is a
miracle.
From “Physics and Reality,” Journal of the Franklin Institute
221, no. 3 (March 1936), 349–382. Reprinted in Ideas and
Opinions, 292. Popularly rephrased as, “The most incomprehensible
thing about the universe is that it is
comprehensible.”
Compromise
The path to a lazy compromise is a one-way street.
There is no U-turn and no stopping.
To Johanna Fantova, October 9, 1948, one of three aphorisms
sent to her. Einstein Archives 87-347
Conscience
Never do anything against conscience even if the
state demands it.
 
424 The Quotations
From a conversation with Virgil G. Hinshaw, Jr., quoted in
Hinshaw’s contribution to Schilpp, Albert Einstein: Philosopher
Scientist (1949), 653
*Conscience supersedes the authority of the law of
the state.
Another version of the above statement. From “Human
Rights,” a message to the Chicago Decalogue Society of
Lawyers upon receiving its award for contributions to
human rights. The message had been written just before
December 5, 1953 (Einstein Archives 28-1012), and was
translated and recorded before being played at the ceremony
on February 20, 1954. See Rowe and Schulmann,
Einstein on Politics, 497
Creativity
Without creative personalities able to think and
judge independently, the upward development of
society is as unthinkable as the development of the
individual personality without the nourishing soil
of the community.
From “Society and Personality,” 1932. Published in Mein
Weltbild (1934), 12; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 14
I lived in solitude in the country and noticed how
the monotony of a quiet life stimulates the creative
mind.
From a speech, “Science and Civilization,” at the Royal Albert
Hall, London, October 3, 1933. Published in 1934 as
“Europe’s Danger–Europe’s Hope.” Quoted in The Times
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 425
(London), October 4, 1933, 14, though the remarks are not
in the original written version of the speech. Einstein Archives
28-253
Crises
Only through perils and upheavals can Nations be
brought to further developments. May the present
upheavals lead to a better world.
From a speech, “Science and Civilization,” at the Royal Albert
Hall, London, October 3, 1933. Published in 1934 as
“Europe’s Danger–Europe’s Hope.” Quoted in The Times
(London), October 4, 1933, 14. Einstein Archives 28-253
Curiosity
The important thing is not to stop questioning. Curiosity
has its own reason for existing. One cannot
help but be in awe when one contemplates the mysteries
of eternity, of life, of the marvelous structure
of reality. It is enough if one tries to comprehend
only a little of this mystery every day.
From the memoirs of William Miller, an editor, quoted in
Life magazine, May 2, 1955
This delicate little plant [curiosity], aside from stimulation,
stands mainly in need of freedom.
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 17
 
426 The Quotations
Death Penalty
I have reached the conviction that the abolition of
the death penalty is desirable. Reasons: (1) Irreversibility
in the event of an error in justice; (2) detrimental
moral influence on those who . . . have to
carry out the procedure.
To a Berlin publisher, November 3, 1927. Einstein Archives
46-009. However, several months earlier, according to the
New York Times, the story had been a bit different: “Professor
Einstein does not favor the abolition of the death penalty.
. . . He could not see why society should not rid itself
of individuals proved socially harmful. He added that society
had no greater right to condemn a person to life imprisonment
than it had to sentence him to death”; see the New
York Times, March 6, 1927; also noted in Pais, Einstein Lived
Here, 174
I am not for punishment at all, but only for measures
that save society and protect it. In principle, I
would not be opposed to killing individuals who
are worthless or dangerous in that sense. I am against
it only because I do not trust people, i.e., the
courts. What I value in life is quality rather than
quantity.
To Valentine Bulgakov, who had been Tolstoy’s secretary,
who asked Einstein his thoughts on war and the death
penalty, November 4, 1931. Einstein Archives 45-702
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 427
Doctors
*Oh, zose surgeons, zey are vizards.
Encouragement to neighbor Eric Rogers, who was about
to undergo an operation. Related by Ralph Baierlein, who
later taught with Rogers at Princeton (letter to me of
March 21, 2006)
England, the English, and the English Language
*If scholars would take their profession more seriously
than their political passions, they would guide
their actions more according toward cultural factors
than political ones. . . . In this regard, the English
have behaved far more nobly than our colleagues
here. . . . How magnifi cent their attittude has been
toward me and relativity theory! . . . I can only say:
Hats off to the fellows!
To Fritz Haber, March 9, 1921. Einstein felt that relativity
theory had become a political issue in Germany. CPAE,
Vol. 12, Doc. 88
*The wonderful experiences in England are still
fresh in my mind and like a dream. The impression
that this land and its wonderful intellectual and political
traditions has made on me was even deeper,
longer lasting, and greater than I had anticipated.
To Lord Richard B. S. Haldane, June 21, 1921. CPAE,
Vol. 12, Doc. 155
 
428 The Quotations
Whereas in Germany, in general, the judgment of
my theory depended upon the political orientation
of the newspapers, the English scientists’ attitude
has proven that their sense of objectivity cannot be
muddled by political viewpoints.
From “How I Became a Zionist,” Jüdische Rundschau,
June 21, 1921. See CPAE, Vol. 7, Doc. 56
More than any other people, you Englishmen have
carefully cultivated the bond of tradition and preserved
the living and conscious continuity of succeeding
generations. You have in this way endowed
with vitality and reality the distinctive soul of your
people and the soaring soul of humanity.
To the Royal Society (U.K.) on the occasion of the Newton
bicentenary, March 1927. Reprinted in Nature 119 (1927),
467. Einstein Archives 1-058
I cannot write in English, because of the treacherous
spelling. When I am reading, I only hear it and am unable
to remember what the written word looks like.
To Max Born, September 7, 1944, expressing the diffi culty
he had with the language of his adopted country, even
though he was eager to become an American citizen. In
Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 145. Einstein Archives 8-207
Epistemology
When I think of the most able students I have encountered
in my teaching—I mean those who have
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 429
distinguished themselves not only by skill but by
independence of thought—then I must confess that
all have had a lively interest in epistemology. No
one can deny that epistemologists have paved the
road for progress [toward the theory of relativity];
Hume and Mach, at least, have helped me considerably,
both directly and indirectly.
From “Ernst Mach,” Physikalische Zeitschrift 17 (1916).
CPAE, Vol. 6, Doc. 29
Epistemology without contact with science becomes
an empty scheme. Science without epistemology
is—insofar as it is thinkable at all—primitive and
muddled.
From “Reply to Criticisms,” in Schilpp, Albert Einstein:
 Philosopher-Scientist, 684
*In thinking, we use with a certain “right,” concepts
to which there is no access from the materials of sensory
experience if the situation is viewed from a
logical point of view.
From “Russell’s Theory of Knowledge,” in Paul Schilpp,
ed., The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell (Library of Living
Philosophers, 1944), 287. Einstein Archives 1-139
Flying Saucers and Extraterrestrials
*There is every reason to believe that Mars and other
planets are inhabited. But if intelligent creatures do
 
430 The Quotations
exist, as we may assume they do elsewhere in the
universe, I should not expect them to try to communicate
with the earth by wireless. Light rays, the direction
of which can be controlled much more easily,
would more probably be the first method attempted.
From an interview in Berlin on the “Mystic Wireless.” Reported
in the Daily Mail (London), January 31, 1921, 5.
CPAE, Vol. 12, Calendar
I have no reason to believe that there is something
real behind the stories of the “Flying Saucers.”
To a boy in Hartford, Connecticut, November 15, 1950. Einstein
Archives 59-510. Einstein believed that people should
not read science fi ction—that it distorts science and gives
people the illusion of understanding science.
Those people have seen something. What it is, I do
not know and I am not curious to know.
To L. Gardner, July 23, 1952. Einstein Archives 59-803
Force
Where belief in the omnipotence of physical force
gets the upper hand in political life, this force takes
on a life of its own and proves stronger than the men
who think about using force as a tool.
From an address at Carnegie Hall in New York on receiving
the One World Award, April 27, 1948. Published in Out
of My Later Years; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 147
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 431
Games
I do not play games. . . . There is no time for it. When
I get through with work, I don’t want anything that
requires the working of the mind.
Quoted in the New York Times, March 28, 1936, 34: 2. However,
Einstein did like to play with puzzles, though this
hobby may have started later in his life.
Good Acts
Good acts are like good poems. One may easily
get their drift, but they are not always rationally
understood.
To Maurice Solovine, April 9, 1947. Published in Letters to
Solovine, 99, 101. Einstein Archives 21-250
Graphology
It was interesting to me that it is possible to classify
handwriting in such an exhaustive manner. I also
appreciate that you were able to separate clearly the
objective characteristics from the purely intuitive,
which, by the way, should not be discredited that
much by the example of Hitler.
Handwritten letter to graphologist Thea Lewinson, September
4, 1942 (for sale on eBay, November 5, 2003)
 
432 The Quotations
Home
It is not so important where one settles down. The
best thing is to follow your instincts without too
much refl ection.
To Max Born, March 3, 1920. In Born, Born-Einstein Letters,
25. CPAE, Vol. 9, Doc. 337
Homosexuality
Homosexuality should not be punishable except to
protect children.
To the World League for Sexual Reform, Berlin, September 6,
1929. Quoted in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein,
305–306. Einstein Archives 48-304
Immigrants
*[Immigrants] have contributed in their way to the
fl owering of the community, and their individual
striving and suffering have remained unknown.
Said at the dedication of the Wall of Fame at the World’s
Fair in New York, 1939–1940. Einstein Archives 28-529
*Unemployment is not decreased by restricting immigration.
For [unemployment] depends on faulty
distribution of work among those capable of work.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 433
Immigration increases consumption as much as it
does demand on labor. Immigration strengthens not
only the internal economy of a sparsely populated
country, but also its defensive power.
Ibid.
Individuals/Individuality
What is truly valuable in our bustle of life is not the
nation . . . but the creative and impressionable individuality,
the personality—he who produces the
noble and sublime while the common herd remains
dull in thought and insensible in feeling.
From “What I Believe,” Forum and Century 84 (1930),
193–194. See Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 229
Everyone should be respected as an individual, but
not idolized.
Ibid.
Valuable achievement can sprout from human society
only when it is sufficiently loosened to make
possible the free development of an individual’s
abilities.
From an article on tolerance, June 1934. Einstein Archives
28-280
 
434 The Quotations
*It is not possible to imagine a forest made up only
of vines. It needs trees that are able to stand by virtue
of their own strength.
To Johanna Fantova, October 9, 1948, one of three aphorisms
sent to her. Einstein Archives 87-347
While it is true that an inherently free and scrupulous
person may be destroyed, such an individual
can never be enslaved or used as a blind tool.
From “On the Moral Obligation of the Scientist,” for the
Italian Society for the Advancement of Science, October
1950. Einstein Archives 28-882
It is important for the common good to foster individuality:
for only the individual can produce the
new ideas which the community needs for its continuous
improvement and requirements—indeed,
to avoid sterility and petrifi cation.
From a message for a Ben Schemen dinner, March 1952.
Einstein Archives 28-931
Intelligence
It is abhorrent to me when a fine intelligence is
paired with an unsavory character.
To Jakob Laub, May 19, 1909. CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 161
We have been endowed with just enough intelligence
to be able to see clearly just how utterly inad-
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 435
equate that intelligence is when we are confronted
with what exists. If this humility could be imparted
to everybody, the world of human endeavors would
become more appealing.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, September 19, 1932.
Quoted in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 305. Einstein
Archives 32-353
We should take care not to make intellect our god; it
has, of course, powerful muscles, but no personality.
From “The Goal of Human Existence,” April 11, 1943. Published
in Out of My Later Years, 235. Einstein Archives
28-587
Intuition
All great achievements of science must start from
intuitive knowledge, namely, in axioms, from which
deductions are then made. . . . Intuition is the necessary
condition for the discovery of such axioms.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein,
180
I believe in intuitions and inspirations. . . . I sometimes
feel that I am right. I do not know that I am.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 446
 
436 The Quotations
Invention
Invention is not the product of logical thought,
even though the final product is tied to a logical
structure.
Written for Schweizerische Hochschulzeitung, 1955. Reprinted
in Seelig, Helle Zeit, Dunkle Zeit. Quoted in Pais, Subtle Is the
Lord, 131. Einstein Archives 1-205
Italy and the Italians
*On the 15th [of October] I’ll leave with my son
for Bologna and show off my sauerkraut-Italian.
The grandchildren of Dante are really in store for
something!
To Hermann Anschütz-Kaempfe, October 11, 1921. CPAE,
Vol. 12, Doc. 263
The ordinary Italian . . . uses words and expressions
of a high level of thought and cultural content. . . .
The people of northern Italy are the most civilized
people I have ever met.
Quoted by H. Cohen in Jewish Spectator, January 1969, 16
The happy months of my sojourn in Italy are my
most beautiful memories.
To Ernesta Marangoni, August 16, 1946. In Physis 18 (1976),
174–178. Einstein Archives 57-113
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 437
Japan and the Japanese
*I well remember your visit to Bern, especially since
you were the first Japanese, indeed the first East
Asian, whose acquaintance I ever made. You amazed
me with your great theoretical knowledge.
To Ayao Kuwaki, December 38, 1920. Einstein had met Kuwaki
in March 1909. CPAE, Vol. 10, Doc. 246
*The invitation to Tokyo pleased me very much, especially
considering my long-standing interest in
the people and cultures of East Asia.
To Koshin Murobuse, September 27, 1921, before Einstein
embarked on his travels in 1922. CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 246
The Japanese loves his country and its people more
than others do . . . yet he feels like a stranger in foreign
countries more than others. I have learned . . .
to understand the shyness of the Japanese toward
Europeans and Americans: in our countries, education
is focused entirely on struggling to survive as
individuals. . . . Family bonds are weakened, and . . .
isolation of the individual is looked upon as a necessary
consequence in the struggle for existence. . . . It
is completely different in Japan. The individual here
is left to himself much less than in Europe and
America. Public opinion here is even greater than in
our countries, and sees to it that family structure is
not weakened.
 
438 The Quotations
Kaizo 5, no. 1 (January 1923), 339. In November–December
1922 Einstein went on a six-week trip to Japan, where he
was received with great enthusiasm. In addition to Einstein’s
other attributes, its citizens may also have been
curious about him because the Japanese characters for “relativity
principle” are very similar to those for “love” and
“sex” (see Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 528). Einstein Archives
36-477.1
This flowerlike being: here the ordinary mortal must
defer to the poet’s words.
On Japanese women. Ibid.
May they not forget to keep pure the great heritage
that puts them ahead of the West: the artistic confi guration
of life, the simplicity and modesty of personal
needs, and the purity and serenity of the Japanese
soul.
Ibid., 338
It was wonderful in Japan—genteel manners, a
lively interest in everything, an artistic sense, intellectual
honesty together with common sense—a
wonderful people in a picturesque land.
To Maurice Solovine, May 20, 1923. Published in Letters to
Solovine, 58–59. Einstein Archives 21-189
I have, for the first time, seen a happy and healthy
society whose members are fully absorbed in it.
To Michele Besso, May 24, 1924. Einstein Archives 7-349
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 439
Japan is now like a great kettle without a safety
valve. It does not have enough land to enable its
population to exist and develop. The situation must
somehow be remedied if we are to avoid a terrible
confl ict.
Quoted in the New York Times, May 17, 1925, in an interview
with Herman Bernstein. Quoted in Nathan and Norden,
Einstein on Peace, 75. Three years later, the Japanese occupied
the Shantung region of China and many years of
confl ict ensued.
Knowledge
*Knowledge exists in two forms—lifeless, stored in
books, and alive in the consciousness of men. The
second form of existence is after all the essential one;
the first, indispensable as it may be, occupies only
an inferior position.
In the last paragraph of “Message in Honor of Morris Raphael
Cohen” for the Cohen Student Memorial Fund, November
15, 1949. Reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 80
Love
Love brings much happiness, much more so than
pining for someone brings pain.
To Marie Winteler, his fi rst girlfriend, April 21, 1896 (at age
seventeen). CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 18
 
440 The Quotations
Falling in love is not at all the most stupid thing that
people do—but gravitation cannot be held responsible
for it.
A scribbled response on a letter from Frank Wall, 1933, in
reply to his letter asking if it would be “reasonable to assume
that it is while a person is standing on his head [i.e.,
as the world rotates]—or rather upside down—he falls in
love and does other stupid things.” Quoted in Dukas and
Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 56. Einstein Archives
31-845
Where there is love, there is no imposition.
To editor and friend Saxe Commins, Summer 1953. Quoted
in Sayen, Einstein in America, 294
I am sorry that you are having difficulties bringing
your girlfriend [from Dublin to the United States].
But as long as she is there and you are here, you
should be able to maintain a harmonious relationship.
So why do you want to press the issue?
To Cornel Lanczos, February 14, 1955. Einstein Archives
15-328
Marriage
My parents . . . think of a wife as a man’s luxury that
he can afford only when he is making a comfortable
living. I have a low opinion of this view of the relationship
between man and wife, because it makes the
wife and the prostitute distinguishable only insofar
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 441
as the former is able to secure a lifelong contract from
the man because of her favorable social rank.
To Mileva Mari´c, August 6, 1900. See The Love Letters, 23.
CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 70
It is not a lack of real affection that scares me away
again and again from marriage. Is it a fear of the
comfortable life, of nice furniture, of dishonor that I
burden myself with, or even the fear of becoming a
contented bourgeois?
To Elsa Löwenthal, after August 3, 1914. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 32
The solitude and peace of mind are serving me quite
well, not the least of which is due to the excellent
and truly enjoyable relationship with my cousin; its
stability will be guaranteed by the avoidance of
marriage.
To Michele Besso, February 12, 1915. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 56.
Of course, Einstein did marry Elsa four years later.
My aim is to smoke it, but as a result things tend to
get clogged up, I’m afraid. Life, too, is like smoking,
especially marriage.
Recalled by Ippei Okamoto, a Japanese cartoonist, while
Einstein was in Japan in 1922. Okamato had asked him if
he smoked his pipe for the pleasure of smoking, or simply
to engage in unclogging and refi lling his pipe. Quoted in
Kantha, An Einstein Dictionary, 199; and American Journal of
Physics 49 (1981), 930–940
 
442 The Quotations
Why should one not admit a man [to the United
States] . . . who dares to oppose every war except
the inevitable one with his own wife?
In a reply to the right-wing Women Patriot Corporation,
who felt Einstein would be a bad infl uence on Americans
and should not be allowed to enter the country, December
1932. Einstein Archives 28-213
Marriage is the unsuccessful attempt to make something
lasting out of an incident.
Quoted by Otto Nathan, April 10, 1982, in an interview
with J. Sayen for Einstein in America, 80. Also mentioned
in Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” December 5,
1953
That is dangerous—but then, any marriage is
dangerous.
In answer to the question of a Jewish student at Princeton
about whether interfaith marriage should be tolerated.
Sayen, Einstein in America, 70
Marriage is but slavery made to appear civilized.
Quoted by Konrad Wachsmann in Grüning, Ein Haus für
Albert Einstein, 159
Marriage makes people treat each other as articles of
property and no longer as free human beings.
Ibid.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 443
Materialism
Human beings can attain a worthy and harmonious
life only if they are able to rid themselves, within the
limits of human nature, of striving to fulfill wishes
of the material kind. The goal is to raise the spiritual
values of society.
At a planning conference in Princeton of American Friends
of Hebrew University, September 19, 1954. Quoted in the
New York Times, September 20, 1954. Einstein Archives
37-354
Miracles
I admit that thoughts infl uence the body.
Quoted by W. Hermanns in A Talk with Einstein, October
1943. Einstein Archives 55-285
A “miracle” is an exception from lawfulness; hence,
where lawfulness does not exist, its exception, i.e., a
miracle, also cannot exist.
Recalled by David Reichinstein in Die Religion des Gebildeten
(Zurich, 1941), 21. Quoted and discussed in Jammer,
Einstein and Religion, 89
Morality
One must shy away from questionable undertakings,
even when they bear a high-sounding name.
 
444 The Quotations
To Maurice Solovine, May 20, 1923, on Einstein’s resignation
from a League of Nations commission. Published in
Letters to Solovine, 59. Einstein Archives 21-189
Morality is of the highest importance—but for us,
not for God.
To M. Schayer, August 1, 1927. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 66. Einstein Archives
48-380
The content of scientific theory itself offers no moral
foundation for the personal conduct of life.
From “Science and God: A Dialogue,” Forum and Century
83 (June 1930), 373
The destiny of civilized humanity depends more
than ever on the moral forces it is capable of
generating.
From “Address to the Student Disarmament Meeting,”
February 27, 1932. Published in Mein Weltbild; reprinted in
Ideas and Opinions, 94, and New York Times, February 28,
1932
There is nothing divine about morality; it is a purely
human affair.
From “The Religious Spirit of Science.” Published in Mein
Weltbild (1934), 18; reprinted in Ideas and Opinions, 40
Let us not forget that human knowledge and skills
alone cannot lead humanity to a happy and digni-
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 445
fi ed life. Humanity has every reason to place the
proclaimers of high moral standards and values
above the discoverers of objective truth. What humanity
owes to personalities like Buddha, Moses,
and Jesus ranks for me higher than all the achievements
of the inquiring constructive mind.
Statement in September 1937 for a unident “Preaching
Mission.” Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein,
the Human Side, 70. Einstein Archives 28-401
Morality is not a fixed and stark system. . . . It is a
task never finished, something that is always present
to guide our judgment and inspire our conduct.
From “Morals and Emotions,” a commencement address at
Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania, June 6, 1938. Quoted in
the New York Times, June 7, 1938. Einstein Archives 29-083
The most important human endeavor is the striving
for morality in our actions. Our inner balance and
even our very existence depend on it. Only morality
in our actions can give beauty and dignity to life.
To the Reverend C. Greenway, a minister in Brooklyn, November
20, 1950. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 95. Einstein Archives 28-894,
59-871
Without “ethical culture,” there is no salvation for
humanity.
From “The Need for Ethical Culture,” January 5, 1951. Einstein
Archives 28-904
 
446 The Quotations
Mysticism
*The mystical trend of our present time, especially
evident in the enthusiastic growth of so-called theosophy
and spiritualism, is to me a symptom of confusion
and weakness. Since our inner experiences consist
of reproductions and combinations of sensory
impressions, the concept of a soul without a body
seems to me to be empty and devoid of meaning.
To Viennese poet Lili Halpern-Neuda, February 5, 1921.
CPAE, Vol. 12, Doc. 41. See Doc. 40, n. 3, for background.
I have never imputed to Nature a purpose or a goal,
or anything that could be understood as anthropomorphic.
What I see in Nature is a magnificent structure
that we can comprehend only very imperfectly,
and that must fill a thinking person with a feeling of
humility. This is a genuinely religious feeling that
has nothing to do with mysticism.
To Ugo Onofri, 1954 or 1955. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 39. Einstein Archives
60-758
Nature
The most beautiful gift of nature is that it gives one
pleasure to look around and try to comprehend
what we see.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 447
Aphorism, February 23, 1953. In Essays Presented to Leo
Baeck on the Occasion of His Eightieth Birthday (London: East
and West Library, 1954). Einstein Archives 28-962
Pipe Smoking
Pipe smoking contributes to a somewhat calm and
objective judgment in all human affairs.
To Montreal Pipe Smokers Club, upon acceptance of life
membership, March 7, 1950. Quoted in the New York Times,
March 12, 1950. Einstein Archives 60-125. Einstein was said
to be so fond of his pipe that he held on to it even after he
fell into the water during a boating accident; see Ehlers, Liebes
Hertz!, 149. See also under “Marriage”
Posterity
Dear Posterity: If you have not become more just,
more peaceful, and in general more sensible than
we are (or were), then may the Devil take you! Respectfully
expressing his opinion with this devout
hope is (or was) your Albert Einstein.
Princeton, May 4, 1936. Message to posterity written
on parchment. It was put in an airtight metal box in the
cornerstone of the Schuster publishing house (today
Simon & Schuster) in New York. Einstein Archives
51-798
 
448 The Quotations
The Press
The Press, which is mostly controlled by vested interests,
has an excessive influence on public opinion.
From “Impressions of the U.S.A,” ca. 1931. Source misquoted
in Ideas and Opinions, 5. Einstein Archives 28-167
Prohibition
Nothing is more destructive of respect for the government
and the law of the land than passing laws
that cannot be enforced. It is an open secret that the
dangerous increase in crime in this country is closely
connected with this.
Ibid.
I don’t drink, so I couldn’t care less.
Statement about Prohibition at a press conference on his arrival
in San Diego, December 30, 1930, on board the Oakland.
Shown in Nova’s Einstein biography on PBS, 1979, and
in A&E Television’s Einstein biography, VPI International,
1991. Einstein disliked alcohol and remained a teetotaler in
his later years, perhaps due to his sensitive digestive system;
see Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 81
Psychoanalysis
I should very much like to remain in the darkness of
not having been analyzed.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 449
To German psychotherapist H. Freund, in response to the
request that he take part in a study based on Adlerian psychology,
January 1927. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 35. Einstein Archives 46-304
I am not able to venture a judgment on so important
a phase of modern thought. However, it seems to me
that psychoanalysis is not always salutary. It may
not always be helpful to delve into the unconscious.
From an interview with G. S. Viereck, “What Life Means to
Einstein,” Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929; reprinted
in Viereck, Glimpses of the Great, 442
I don’t think it’s impossible that dreams are suppressed
wishes, but I’m not convinced.
Quoted in Fantova, “Conversations with Einstein,” November
5, 1953
Public Speaking
I have just got a new theory of eternity.
Alleged remark to a table-mate while listening to longwinded
speeches at a National Academy of Science dinner
honoring him. Cited by Daniel Greenberg, “A Statue without
Stature,” Washington Post, December 12, 1978
Rickshaw Pullers
I felt extremely ashamed to be part of such hideous
treatment of human beings but couldn’t do anything
 
450 The Quotations
about it. . . . They know how to beseech and beg
every tourist until he capitulates.
From his Travel Diary, October 28, 1922, Colombo, Ceylon
(now Sri Lanka). Einstein stopped there en route to Singapore,
Hong Kong, Shanghai in China, and Japan.
Sailing
Sailing in the secluded coves of the coast here is
more than relaxing. . . . I have a compass that shines
in the dark, like a serious seafarer. But I am not so
talented in this art, and I am satisfied if I can manage
to get myself off the sandbanks on which I become
lodged.
To Queen Elisabeth of Belgium, March 20, 1954. Einstein
Archives 32-385
The sport that demands the least energy.
Quoted by A. P. French, in French, Einstein: A Centenary
Volume, 61
Sculpture
The ability to portray people in motion requires the
highest measure of intuition and talent.
Quoted by Konrad Wachsmann in Grüning, Ein Haus für
Albert Einstein, 240. Einstein’s stepdaughter, Margot, was
a sculptor, and Einstein himself sat for a number of
sculptures.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 451
Sex Education
Regarding sex education: no secrets!
To the World League for Sexual Reform, Berlin, September 6,
1929. Einstein Archives 48-304
Success
Try to become not a man of success, but try rather to
become a man of value.
Quoted by William Miller in Life magazine, May 2, 1955
Thinking
The words of the language, as they are written or
spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism
of thought.
To Jacques Hadamard, June 17, 1944. Quoted in An Essay
on the Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field, Appendix
2. Einstein Archives 12-056
I vill a little t’ink.
According to Banesh Hoffmann, this is the phrase Einstein
used in his broken English when he needed more time to
think about a problem. Quoted in French, Einstein: A Centenary
Volume, 153; Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, Creator and
Rebel, 231, quotes Leopold Infeld saying the same about
Einstein. Also related to me by Einstein’s biographer Abraham
Pais, who knew Einstein.
 
452 The Quotations
[I have no doubt] that our thinking goes on for the
most part without use of signs (words), and beyond
that to a considerable degree unconsciously. For
how, otherwise, should it happen that sometimes
we “wonder” quite spontaneously about some experience?
This “wondering” seems to occur when
an experience comes into conflict with a world of
concepts which is already sufficiently fixed within
us. . . . The development of this thought world is in
a certain sense a continual fl ight from “wonder.”
Written in 1946 for “Autobiographical Notes,” 8–9
Truth
The effort to strive for truth has to precede all other
efforts.
To Alfredo Rocco, November 16, 1931. Einstein Archives
34-725
The search for truth and knowledge is one of the fi nest
attributes of man—though often it is most loudly
voiced by those who strive for it the least.
From “The Goal of Human Existence,” broadcast for the
United Jewish Appeal, April 11, 1943. Einstein Archives
28-587
Truth is what stands the test of experience.
Closing words of foreword to Philipp Frank, Relativity: A
Richer Truth (Boston: Beacon Press, 1950). Quoted in Out of
My Later Years, rev. ed., 115. Einstein Archives 1-160
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 453
It is difficult to say what truth is, but sometimes it is
so easy to recognize a falsehood.
To Jeremiah McGuire, October 24, 1953. Einstein Archives
60-483
Whoever is careless with truth in small matters cannot
be trusted in important affairs.
From a draft of a television address to be delivered on occasion
of the seventh anniversary of Israel’s independence.
Written in April 1955, about a week before Einstein’s death.
Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 640. Einstein
Archives 60-003
The pompous vocabulary and revolutionary overtones
of your letter make me suspicious. Truth tends
to present itself modestly and in simple garb.
To Hans Wittig, May 3, 1920. Einstein Archives 45-274
Vegetarianism
Although I have been prevented by outward circumstances
from observing a strictly vegetarian diet,
I have long been an adherent to the cause in principle.
Besides agreeing with the aims of vegetarianism
for aesthetic and moral reasons, it is my view
that a vegetarian manner of living by its purely physical
effect on the human temperament would most
benefi cially infl uence the lot of mankind.
To Hermann Huth, December 27, 1930. Supposedly published
in the German magazine Vegetarische Warte, which
 
454 The Quotations
was published from 1882 to 1935; Huth was the vice-
 president of the Vegetarier-Bund, the German vegetarian
society that published the magazine. (Thanks to David
Hurwitz for this information.) Einstein Archives 46-756
I have always eaten animal flesh with a somewhat
guilty conscience.
To Max Kariel, August 3, 1953. Einstein Archives 60-058
When you buy a piece of land to plant your cabbage
and apples, you first have to drain it; that will kill all
forms of animal and plant life that exist in that water.
Later you would have to kill all the worms and caterpillars
etc. that would eat your plants. If you must
avoid all this killing on moral grounds, you will in
the end have to kill yourself, all for the sake of leaving
alive those creatures who have no such conception
of higher moral principles.
Ibid. Quoted in Vegetarisches Universum, December 1957
So I am living without fats, without meat, without
fi sh, but am feeling quite well this way. It almost
seems to me that man was not born to be a carnivore.
To Hans Muehsam, March 30, 1954. Einstein Archives
38-435. Einstein was probably not a vegetarian by choice,
for he left behind no remarks that it was a moral issue for
him. He had lifelong stomach problems that required him
to watch his diet carefully. He may have avoided alcohol
for the same reason.
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 455
Violence
Violence may at times have quickly cleared away an
obstruction, but it has never proved itself to be
creative.
Comment on an article by J. Krutch, “Was Europe a Success?”
(1934). Reprinted in Einstein on Humanism, 49. Einstein
Archives 28-282
Wealth
One should not forget that wealth has its obligations.
To Heinrich Zangger, March 26, 1920. CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 361
I am absolutely convinced that no amount of wealth
can help humanity forward, even in the hands of the
most dedicated worker in this cause. The example
of great and pure personalities can lead us to noble
deeds and views. Money only appeals to selfi shness,
and, without fail, it tempts its owner to abuse it. Can
anyone imagine Moses, Jesus, or Gandhi with the
moneybags of Carnegie?
From “On Wealth,” December 9, 1932, for Die Bunte Woche.
Published in Mein Weltbild (1934), 10–11; reprinted in Ideas
and Opinions, 12–13
The economists will have to revise their theories of
value.
 
456 The Quotations
Upon being told that two of his handwritten manuscripts
sold for $11.5 million at an auction for the war bonds effort.
Recounted by historian Julian Boyd to Dorothy Pratt, February
11, 1944, Princeton University Archives; quoted in
Sayen, Einstein in America, 150
All I want in my dining room is a pine table, a bench,
and a few chairs.
Quoted in Maja Einstein’s biography of her brother, in
CPAE, Vol. 1; also quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert
Einstein, the Human Side, 14
Wisdom
Wisdom is not a product of schooling but of the lifelong
attempt to acquire it.
To J. Dispentiere, March 24, 1954. Einstein Archives 59-495
Women
We men are deplorable, dependent creatures. But
compared with these women, every one of us is king,
for he stands more or less on his own two feet, not
constantly waiting for something outside of himself
to cling to. They, however, always wait for someone
to come along who will use them as he sees fit. If this
does not happen, they simply fall to pieces.
To Michele Besso, July 21, 1917, in a discussion about Einstein’s
wife, Mileva. CPAE, Vol. 8, Doc. 239
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 457
Very few women are creative. I would not send a
daughter of mine to study physics. I’m glad my wife
doesn’t know any science. My fi rst wife did.
Quoted by Esther Salaman, who had been a young student
in Berlin when Einstein was there, in the Listener, September
8, 1968; also quoted in Highfi eld and Carter, The Private
Lives, 158
As in all other fields, in science the way should be
made easy for women. Yet it must not be taken amiss
if I regard the possible results with a certain amount
of skepticism. I am referring to certain restrictive
parts of a woman’s constitution that were given her
by Nature and which forbid us from applying the
same standard of expectation to women as to men.
1920. Quoted by Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein, 79
When women are in their homes, they are attached
to their furnishings . . . they are always fussing with
them. When I am with a woman on a trip, I am the
only piece of furniture she has available, and she
cannot refrain from circling around me all day and
making some improvements on me.
Quoted in Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, 126. Einstein
was prone to making wisecracks such as this one.
Work
Work is the only thing that gives substance to life.
To son Hans Albert, January 4, 1937. Einstein Archives 75-926
 
458 The Quotations
It is really a puzzle what drives one to take one’s
work so devilishly seriously. For whom? For oneself?
One soon departs this world, after all. For one’s contemporaries?
For posterity? No. It remains a puzzle.
To artist Joseph Scharl, December 27, 1949. Einstein Archives
34-207
I am also convinced that one gains the purest joy
from spiritual things only when they are not tied in
with earning one’s livelihood.
To L. Manners, March 19, 1954. Einstein Archives 60-401
Youth
Truly novel ideas emerge only in one’s youth. Later
on one becomes more experienced, famous—and
foolish.
To Heinrich Zangger, December 6, 1917. CPAE, Vol. 8,
Doc. 403
When I read your letters, I am very much reminded
of my youth. In one’s thoughts, one tends to set oneself
against the world. One compares one’s strengths
with everything else, one alternates between despondency
and self-assurance. One has the feeling
that life is eternal and that everything one does and
thinks is so important.
To son Eduard, 1926. Einstein Archives 75-645
 
On Miscellaneous Subjects 459
O, Youth: Do you know that yours is not the fi rst
generation to yearn for a life full of beauty and freedom?
Do you know that all your ancestors have felt
the same as you do—and fell victim to trouble and
hatred? Do you know also that your fervent wishes
can only find fulfillment if you succeed in attaining
a love and an understanding of people, and animals,
and plants, and stars, so that every joy becomes
your joy and every pain your pain?
Written in I. Stern’s autograph album in Caputh, Germany,
1932. Quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the
Human Side, 129
 
 
Einstein’s Verses: A Small Selection
 
 
I realize that much may be lost in translation, especially
in poetry, and maybe it is a mistake to include
in this volume some verses translated from Einstein’s
meticulous German into English. However, a
number of people have asked me to do so. Though
many of these translations, gleaned from a variety of
sources, sound awkward, readers may get a sense
of the extent—and sometimes the limitations—of
Einstein’s poetic talents. The rhythm and rhyme of
most of the poems are similar to those of the German
poet Wilhelm Busch of “Max und Moritz”
fame, and most are infused with humor, often
tongue-in-cheek. Unfortunately, not all of these
translations have that effect. The verses, poems, and
limericks in the Einstein Archives number in the
hundreds. Most are untitled and were often sent to
Einstein’s friends in place of a letter, or added to a
photograph or postcard. I’ve added the translator’s
name if it is known.
*Wherever I go and wherever I stay
There’s always a picture of me on display.
On top of the desk, or out in the hall,
Tied round a neck, or hung on the wall.
Women and men, they play a strange game,
Asking, beseeching: “Please sign your name.”
From the erudite fellow they brook not a quibble
But fi rmly insist on a piece of his scribble.
Sometimes, surrounded by all this good cheer,
I’m puzzled by some of the things that I hear,
 
464 Einstein’s Verses
And wonder, my mind for a moment not hazy,
If I and not they could really be crazy.
Dedicated to Cornelia Wolff, January 1920. In Dukas and
Hoffman, Albert Einstein, the Human Side, 73–74
*A little technology here and there
Can interest thinkers everywhere
And so I boldly think ahead:
The two of us will lay an egg.
In a letter to Rudolf Goldschmidt, November 1928, requesting
a collaboration. Trans. by Aaron Wiener in Neffe, Einstein,
43. Einstein Archives 31-071
*Men and women of all ages
Leave your mark upon these pages.
But not with prose resembling that
Of people as they stop to chat;
Arrange your words in fl owing lines
Like lofty poets’ neat designs.
Begin, and push your fears away
Your writing will not go astray.
Preface to the guestbook at the house in Caputh, May 4,
1930. Trans. by Aaron Wiener in Neffe, Einstein, 306. Einstein
Archives 31-067
*Long-branched and delicately strung,
Nothing will escape her gaze.
 
Einstein’s Verses 465
The welcome sight of her friends
Smiling, and still a weeping willow.
To one of Einstein’s numerous lady friends, Ethel Michanowski,
May 16, 1931. Einstein Archives 84-103
*Duty in mind, pipe in hand
That’s how Captain Trauernicht stands.
Smiling wide, with eyes ablaze
Nothing can escape his gaze.
He looks out on ship and sea
His crew obeys him 1–2–3
Calmly, Trauernicht stands his ground
And takes in everything around.
Written ca. 1932. Trans. by Aaron Wiener in Neffe, Einstein,
28. According to Barbara Wolff of the Einstein Archives,
“Trauernicht” (“Carefree” in the translation) was the captain’s
real name. Einstein Archives 31-099
*Whoever has let a daughter of Eve
Into his black heart
Feels sorry for the day that fl ies by quietly
When he can’t catch a glimpse of her.
To Ethel Michanowski, 1932 or 1933. Einstein Archives 84-108
*A thousand letters in the mail
And every journal tells his tale
What’s he to do when in this mood?
He sits and hopes for solitude.
Written in 1934. Trans. by Aaron Wiener in Neffe, Einstein,
16. Einstein Archives 31-161
 
466 Einstein’s Verses
*All my friends are hoaxing me
—Help me stop the family!
Reality’s enough for me,
I’ve borne it long and faithfully.
And yet it would be nice to fi nd
That I’d possessed the strength of mind
To lay eggs on the side—so long
As others didn’t take it wrong.
A. Einstein, Stepfather
Written in 1936, to friend János Plesch, after Einstein heard
a rumor that he had fathered an illegitimate child. Translation
in Highfi eld and Carter, Private Lives, 93–94. Einstein
Archives 31-178
*The postman brings me every day
Piles of mail, to my dismay.
Oh, why does no one ever reason
That he is one, while we are legion.
Written in 1938. Quoted by Peter Bucky in Neffe, Einstein,
373. Einstein Archives 31-215
*Even if one loves to play
One’s little fi ddle night and day
It’s not right to broadcast it
Lest the list’ners scoff at it.
If you scratch with all your might—
Which is certainly your right—
 
Einstein’s Verses 467
Then bring down the windowpane
So the neighbors don’t complain.
Poem to Emil Hilb, April 18, 1939 (my translation). Einstein
Archives 31-279
The Wisdom of Dialectical Materialism
*Through sweat and effort beyond compare
To arrive at a small grain of truth?
A fool is he who toils to fi nd
What we simply ordain as the Party line.
And those who dare to express doubt
Will quickly fi nd their skulls bashed in.
And thus we educate as never before
Bold spirits to embrace harmony.
Written in 1952. On the same page Einstein scrawled a sarcastic
aphorism, “Inscription for the Marx-Engels Institute:
In the realm of truth-seekers there is no human authority.
He who attempts to play the ruler there will run afoul of
the laughter of the gods”; see Rowe and Schulmann, Einstein
on Politics, 457. The aphorism is translated a bit differently
in the source used in the section “On Humankind” in
this volume. Einstein Archives 28-948
*How much I love that noble man!
More than I can tell with words.
I fear, however, he’ll stand alone
With a halo all his own.
On the Jewish philosopher Baruch Spinoza. Einstein Archives
33-264
 
468 Einstein’s Verses
That little word “we” I mistrust and here’s why:
No man of another can say he is I.
Behind all agreement lies something amiss
All seeming accord cloaks a lurking abyss.
Verse quoted in Dukas and Hoffmann, Albert Einstein, the
Human Side, 100
*Whoever writes grim fairy tales
Will end up in our harshest jails.
But if he dares the truth to tell
We’ll cast his soul down into hell.
Quoted by Peter Bucky in Neffe, Einstein, 285
*The Jews around me that I see
Little pleasure give to me.
When the others I then view
I am glad to be a Jew.
Einstein Archives 31-324. Trans. by Josef Eisinger. Quoted
in Neffe, Einstein, 321
The following poems were written for Johanna Fantova,
Einstein’s last lady-friend, ca. 1947 to 1955.
Translations are my own (with my apologies). The
original German versions and different translations
can be found in Princeton University Library Chronicle
65, no. 1 (Autumn 2003).
*It’s Saturday. I sit alone
With notebook and a lamp aglow.
 
Einstein’s Verses 469
On the table lies my pipe,
Off to bed, it’s late at night!
*It doesn’t help to brood and fret
Hanne has gone out, she said.
True, the errands must be run
For her it certainly is no fun.
*I, most clumsy of them all,
Would have taken quite a fall.
If you hadn’t helped right there,
I would be in great despair.
*What good is 2-8-4-2-J
If silent it resolves to stay?
Each day I toil at home alone,
One’s like an orphan with no phone.
[Written on a day when the phones were out of order.]
 
 
Attributed to Einstein
 
 
Over the past fi fteen years, a number of people have
sent me the sources of quotations that appeared in
this section in the previous editions. I thank them for
this help, and I have inserted the quotations into the
text in the appropriate sections. I’m still looking for
the sources of many of the following quotations.
Some sound genuine, some are apocryphal, and others
are no doubt fakes, created by those who wanted
to use Einstein’s name to lend credibility to a cause
or an idea. Hundreds can be found on the Internet,
on calendars, and in little books containing undocumented
quotations, but I include here only quotations
sent to me by curious readers.
Misattributed to Einstein
International law exists only in textbooks on international
law.
Actually said by Ashley Montagu in his interview with
Einstein. See Montagu’s “Conversations with Einstein,”
Science Digest, July 1985
Education is that which remains, if one has forgotten
everything he learned in school.
Not originally said by Einstein, though he agreed with it.
He quoted this passage by an anonymous “wit” in “On Education,”
in Out of My Later Years, 38. A similar statement
was made by Alan Bennett in Forty Years On, quoted in Oxford
Dictionary of Humorous Quotations (2001), and perhaps
by others as well.
 
474 Attributed to Einstein
Two things inspire me to awe—the starry heavens
above and the moral universe within.
This is an inaccurate version of one of Kant’s most famous
statements: “Two things fi ll the mind with ever new and
increasing wonder and awe, the more often and steadily
we refl ect upon them: the starry heavens above me and the
moral law within me,” in The Critique of Practical Reason
(New York: Open Court, 1969), 162
The wireless telegraph is not difficult to understand.
The ordinary telegraph is like a very long cat. You
pull the tail in New York, and it meows in Los Angeles.
The wireless is the same, only without the cat.
According to Barbara Wolff of the Einstein Archives, this is
an old Jewish joke and can be found in various compendia.
*Insanity is doing the same thing over and over
again and expecting different results.
By Rita Mae Brown, in Sudden Death (New York: Bantam,
1983), 68. Thanks to Barbara Wolff for the source.
We use only 10 percent of our brains.
This myth is repeated frequently and is false. Several articles
have been written about it and were sent to me by
readers. See Michael Brand and Grace A. Reband, “Missing:
90% of the Human Brain,” in www.chicagofl ame.com,
accessed 1/15/2008
As a young man, my fondest dream was to become
a geographer. However, while working in the customs
office, I thought deeply about the matter and
 
Attributed to Einstein 475
concluded that it was far too difficult a subject. With
some reluctance, I turned to physics as a substitute.
Sent by a member of a geography department in South Dakota,
who said this quotation is circulating around many
geography departments. Einstein was obviously already a
physicist by the time he worked in the Patent (not Customs)
Offi ce, so it was a bit late to be thinking of geography
as a possible future career.
Possibly or Probably by Einstein
Everything should be made as simple as possible,
but not simpler.
This quotation prompts the most queries; it appeared in
Reader’s Digest in July 1977, with no documentation. Everyone
seems to know it, yet no one can fi nd its original
source. There appear to be several variants of it, too, most
commonly: “A theory should be made as simple as possible,
but not simpler.” Occam’s Razor, also known as the “principle
of parsimony,” is a scientifi c and philosophic rule that
says that entities should not be multiplied unnecessarily.
This is interpreted as requiring that the simpler of competing
theories be preferred to the more complex, or that explanations
of unknown phenomena be sought fi rst in terms
of known quantities. It could be that someone misattributed
Occam’s Razor to Einstein, and that this saying is actually
over six hundred years older than we think it is.
(William of Ockham lived ca. 1285–1349.) Isaac Newton,
too, was a fan of simplicity: “Nature is pleased with simplicity,
and affects not the pomp of superfl uous causes,” he
wrote. Most likely, the quotation is a paraphrase of some of
Einstein’s other statements about simplicity, many of
which can be found in this book. Einstein’s remark, if Einstein
did say it, of course cannot be taken literally.
 
476 Attributed to Einstein
For international communication, the growth of international
understanding, with the help of an international
language, is not only necessary but selfevident.
Esperanto is the best solution of the idea of
an international language.
This quotation is probably genuine, though I can’t fi nd its
source. The Association Mondiale Anationale, an Esperanto
organization, was founded in Prague in 1921. Einstein
accepted the honorary presidency of the group in
1923 in Kassel, so it is likely that he did make this remark.
It complements his ideas on world government as well.
Esperanto was forbidden both by the Nazis and by Stalin,
and its German proponents were sent to concentration
camps.
No amount of experimentation can ever prove me
right; a single experiment can prove me wrong.
This may be a paraphrase of sentiments expressed in “Induction
and Deduction,” December 25, 1919, CPAE, Vol. 7,
Doc. 28
The significant problems we face cannot be solved
at the same level of thinking that was used when we
created them. (An inelegant variant: The world we
have created today as a result of our thinking thus
far has problems which cannot be solved by thinking
the way we thought when we created them.)
Another common query. Perhaps these are paraphrases of
his 1946 quotation, “A new type of thinking is essential if
mankind is to survive and move toward higher levels” or
“Past thinking and methods did not prevent world wars.
Future thinking must” (see section “On Peace, War, the
 
Attributed to Einstein 477
Bomb, and the Military”). See Schulmann and Rowe, Einstein
on Politics, 383
At such moments one imagines that one stands on
some spot of a small planet gazing in amazement
at the cold yet profoundly moving beauty of the
eternal, the unfathomable. Life and death flow into
one, and there is neither evolution nor eternity, only
Being.
Quoted by psychologist Deepak Chopra, Ageless Body,
Timeless Mind (1993), 280, with no source
Nothing will benefit human health and increase the
chances for survival on Earth as much as the evolution
of a vegetarian diet.
This might be a modifi ed variant of the similar statement
in Einstein’s letter to Hermann Huth (see “Vegetarianism”
quotations).
*The intuitive mind is a sacred gift, and the rational
mind is a faithful servant. We have created a society
that honors the servant and has forgotten the gift.
The substance of our knowledge resides in the
detailed terminology of a fi eld.
In science the work of the individual is so bound
up with that of his scientific predecessors and contemporaries
that it appears almost as an impersonal
product of his generation.
In any conflict between humanity and technology,
humanity will win.
 
PROBABLY NOT BY EINSTEIN
*The difference between genius and stupidity is that
genius has its limits. (Variant: Two things are infi -
nite: the universe and human stupidity; and I’m not
sure about the universe.)
Similar to Gustave Flaubert’s “Human stupidity is infi -
nite,” written to Guy de Maupassant, February 19, 1880.
Thanks to Cécile Caccamo for this source.
*The only way to make money at a roulette wheel is
to steal it when the dealer isn’t looking.
Sent by an Australian reader, who believed he read somewhere
that Einstein had visited a casino and expressed interest
in the mechanics of the roulette wheel. I was not able
to confi rm the story.
*If I could remember the names of all those particles,
I’d be a botanist.
Said to be from “Science, Philosophy and Religion,” but I
could not fi nd it in the reprinted speech in Ideas and
Opinions.
If you think intelligence is dangerous, try ignorance.
Similar to Derek Bok’s “If you think education is expensive,
try ignorance.” See Random House Webster’s Quotationary
(1998).
Compounded interest is more complicated than relativity
theory. (Variants: The most powerful force in
 
Attributed to Einstein 479
the universe is compound interest. The most signifi -
cant invention of the nineteenth century is compounded
interest.)
Quoted by various economists, including Burton Malkiel
in the Princeton Spectator, May 1997, and on several fi nancial
Web sites on the Internet. (Thanks to Steven Feldman
for showing me the variant.)
The most difficult thing to understand is the income
tax. (Variants: The hardest thing to understand in
the world is the income tax. The theory of relativity
is easy; the IRS code is difficult. Preparing a tax return
is more complicated than relativity theory.)
Quoted in the Macmillan Book of Business and Economics
Quotes by M. Jackson (1984). No source given. This quotation
no doubt comes from the cartoon introducing this section:
“Try to make out my theory and your income tax
work will look simple.” In other words, this is the cartoonist’s
sentiment, not Einstein’s.
If the bee becomes extinct, mankind will have only
four years to live: no bees, no pollination, no plants,
no animals, no humans.
According to the Web site, www.snopes.com, this quotation
started to pop up around 1994 during a protest by beekeepers
in Brussels in a pamphlet distributed by the National
Union of French Apiculture. More likely, they
distorted Einstein’s letter of December 12, 1951 to schoolchildren
(see section “On and to Children”).
Astrology is a science in itself and contains an illuminating
body of knowledge. It taught me many
 
480 Attributed to Einstein
things and I am greatly indebted to it. Geophysical
evidence reveals the power of the stars and the planets
in relation to the terrestrial. This is why astrology
is like a life-giving elixir to mankind.
An excellent example of a quotation someone made up and
attributed to Einstein in order to give credibility to an idea
or cause. See Denis Hamel, “The End of the EinsteinAstrologer-Supporter
Hoax,” Skeptical Inquirer 31, no. 6
(November/December 2007), 39–43, for a thorough refutation
of this myth.
Einstein’s “Rules of Work”:
 1. Out of clutter, fi nd simplicity.
 2. From discord, fi nd harmony.
 3. In the middle of diffi culty lies opportunity.
The fi rst “rule” is probably a paraphrase of Einstein’s
many quotations about the value of simplicity. I traced the
second rule to Horace, the Roman poet and satirist, who
had it as Concordia discors (harmony in discord) in his Epistles
I, xii.19. And the third rule has probably been in general
use for ages.
*If at first the idea is not absurd, then there’s no hope
for it.
*I speak to everyone in the same way, whether he is
the garbage man or the president of the university.
*The truth of a theory is in your mind, not your
eyes.
*The world needs heroes, and it’s better they be
harmless men like me than villains like Hitler.
 
Attributed to Einstein 481
*“I am no Einstein,” said Einstein modestly.
*Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired
by age eighteen.
*When asked how he was different from the average
person, Einstein replied: “When asked to look for a
needle in a haystack, the average person would
search until he found the needle; whereas I would
look for all needles.”
*Setting an example is not the main means of infl uencing
another, it is the only means.
*Compounded interest is the eighth wonder of the
world. (Variants: Compounding interest is the greatest
mathematical discovery of all time. Compounding
is mankind’s greatest invention because it allows
for the reliable, systematic accumulation of
wealth. The most powerful force in the universe is
compounded interest.)
*It’s not that I’m so smart, it’s just that I stay with
problems longer.
*Logic will get you from A to B. Imagination will get
you everywhere.
*The only reason there is time is so that everything
doesn’t happen at once.
*To have a better life we must keep choosing how
we are living.
 
482 Attributed to Einstein
*Nothing happens unless something is moved.
*You do not really understand something unless
you can explain it to your grandmother.
*Men marry women with the hope they will never
change. Women marry men with the hope they will
change. Invariably they are both disappointed.
*Any man who can drive safely while kissing a
pretty girl is simply not giving the kiss the attention
it deserves.
*Bureaucracy is the death of all sound work.
*Resolution 1: I will live for God. Resolution 2: If no
one else does, I still will.
*Life is a mystery to be lived, not a problem to be
solved.
The only source of knowledge is experience.
Playing is the highest form of research.
Individuality is an illusion created by skin.
Not everything that counts can be counted, and not
everything that can be counted counts.
Knowledge is experience. Anything else is
information.
There is no hope for an idea that at first does not
seem insane.
The religion of the future will be a cosmic religion.
. . . Buddhism answers this description.
 
Attributed to Einstein 483
The probability of life originating by accident is
comparable to the probability of the unabridged
dictionary resulting from an explosion in a print
shop. (Variant: The idea that this universe in all
its millionfold order and precision is the result of
blind chance is as credible as the idea that if a
print shop blew up all the type would fall down
again in the finished and faultless form of the
dictionary.)
If the facts don’t fi t the theory, change the facts.
There are only two ways to live your life. One is
as though nothing is a miracle. The other is as
though everything is a miracle.
As the circle of light increases, so does the circumference
of darkness.
The practice of science as a whole finds truths and
leads to a correct understanding of the universe,
but science in actual practice is riddled with mistakes
and the residue of human frailties.
The lowest level of awareness is “I know.” Then, “I
don’t know,” “I know I don’t know,” “I don’t
know that I don’t know.”
The levels of intelligence are “Smart, intelligent,
brilliant, genius, simple.”
Death means that one can no longer listen to Mozart.
*Einstein’s Riddle:
There are five houses, painted in five different colors.
A person with a different nationality lives in
 
484 Attributed to Einstein
each house. Each of the five owners drinks a certain
type of beverage, plays a certain sport, and keeps a
specifi c pet. None of the owners has the same pet,
plays the same sport, or drinks the same beverage.
Who owns the fi sh? Here are the facts:
 1. The Briton lives in the red house.
 2. The Swede keeps dogs as pets.
 3. The Dane drinks tea.
 4. The green house is on the left of the white
house.
 5. The owner of the green house drinks coffee.
 6. The person who plays football raises birds.
 7. The owner of the yellow house plays baseball.
 8. The man living in the center house drinks
milk.
 9. The Norwegian lives in the fi rst house.
 10. The man who plays volleyball lives next to the
one who keeps cats.
 11. The man who keeps the horse lives next to the
man who plays baseball.
 12. The owner who plays tennis drinks beer.
 13. The German plays hockey.
 14. The Norwegian lives next to the blue house.
 15. The man who plays volleyball has a neighbor
who drinks water.
To solve the problem, make grids: one column for
each of the five houses, and five rows for nationality,
house color, type of beverage, type of sport, and
kind of pet. SOLUTION (don’t peek!): The fish is
 
Attributed to Einstein 485
owned by the German who lives in house 4 (green),
drinks coffee, and plays hockey.
Supposedly, but not actually, devised by Einstein as a child.
Allegedly only 2 percent of the population can solve it, but
the solution appears to be attainable by those who are patient
and persistent. I include it here for fun and because it
has been attributed to Einstein. Many versions can be
found on the Internet. This version is taken mostly from
the book of the same name by Jeremy Stangroom.
 
 
Others on Einstein
 
 
With the passing of Dr. Albert Einstein, the world
has lost its greatest scientific mind, the human race
one of its most ethical and inspiring personalities,
the Jewish people one of its most loyal sons.
Samuel Belkin, president of Yeshiva University, 1955.
Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 121
Tell me what to do if he says yes. I had to offer the
post to him because it is impossible not to. But if he
accepts, we are in for trouble.
David Ben Gurion to Yitzak Navon, after Israeli ambassador
to the United States, Abba Eban, was instructed to offer
the presidency of Israel to Einstein in November 1952.
Quoted in Holton and Elkana, Albert Einstein: Historical and
Cultural Perspectives, 295
For a long time, I have been thinking of how many . . .
ties . . . bind the two of us together. I owe to you my
wife, and along with her, my son and grandson; I
owe to you my job, and with that, the tranquility of
a sanctuary . . . as well as the financial security for
hard times. I owe to you the scientific synthesis that
I would never have acquired without such a friendship.
. . . On my side, I was your audience in 1904
and 1905. In helping you edit your communications
on quanta I deprived you of a part of your glory.
Michele Besso to Einstein, January 17, 1928. Quoted in Jeremy
Bernstein, “A Critic at Large,” New Yorker, February 27,
1989. Einstein Archives 7-101. Einstein had introduced
 
490 Others on Einstein
Besso to his future wife and recommended him for the job
he held in the Swiss patent offi ce in Bern for many years.
When something struck him as funny, his eyes twinkled
merrily and he laughed with his whole being. . . .
He was ready for humor.
Algernon Black, 1940. Einstein Archives 54-834
*Einstein, as you know, is no Zionist, and I ask you
not to try to make him a Zionist or to try to attach
him to our organization. . . . Einstein, who leans toward
socialism, feels very involved with the cause
of Jewish labor and Jewish workers. [He] . . . often
says things out of naiveté which are unwelcome
by us.
Kurt Blumenfeld, in The War about Zionism (Stuttgart:
Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1976), 65–66. Cited in Jerome, Einstein
on Israel and Zionism, 25
Through Albert Einstein’s work the horizon of mankind
has been immeasurably widened, at the same
time as our world picture has attained a unity and
harmony never dreamed of before. The background
for such an achievement was created by preceding
generations of the world community of scientists,
and its full consequences will only be revealed to
coming generations.
Physicist Niels Bohr. Quoted in Einstein’s obituary in the
New York Times, April 19, 1955
 
Others on Einstein 491
The memory of his noble personality will always remain
a fresh source of inspiration and strength to
those of us who were happy enough to become personally
acquainted with him.
Niels Bohr after Einstein’s death, 1955. Quoted in Cahn,
Einstein, 122
*Now his living voice is silent, but those who heard
it will hear it until the end of their days.
Hedi Born, wife of physicist Max Born and a close friend,
in the Borns’ Der Luxus des Gewissens (Luxury of a Conscience)
(Munich: Nymphenburger, 1969). Quoted by their
son Gustav Born in The Born-Einstein Letters, vi
Einstein would be one of the greatest theoretical
physicists of all time even if he had not written a
single line on relativity.
Physicist and close friend Max Born. Quoted in Hoffmann,
Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 7
He knew, as did Socrates, that we know nothing.
Max Born, after Einstein’s death. Quoted in Clark,
Einstein, 415
*He saw in the quantum mechanics of today a
useful intermediate stage between the traditional
classical physics and a still completely unknown
“physics of the future” based on general relativity in
which . . . the traditional concepts of physical reality
 
492 Others on Einstein
and determinism come into their own again. Thus
he regarded statistical quantum mechanics to be not
wrong but “incomplete.”
Max Born, in Born-Einstein Letters, 199
*Time and time again [Einstein] filled me with
amazement, and indeed enthusiasm, as I watched
the ease with which he would, in discussion, experimentally
change his point of view, at times tentatively
adopting the opposite view and viewing the
whole problem from a new and totally changed
angle.
Writer and editor Max Brod, whom Einstein befriended in
Prague. In Brod, Streitbares Leben (Munich, 1969). See also
Fölsing, Einstein, 283
He always took his celebrity with humor and laughed
at himself.
Family friend Thomas Bucky, shown in A&E Television’s
Einstein biography, VPI International, 1991
*The bright boys here all study Math,
And Albie Einstein points the path.
Although he seldom takes the air,
We wish to God he’d cut his hair.
From “The Faculty Song” of the Princeton songbook Carmina
Princetonia (an annual event through 1968), precise
date unknown. Thanks to Trevor Lipscombe for this
submission.
 
Others on Einstein 493
Certainly he was a great savant, but beyond that he
was also a pillar of human conscience at a moment
when so many civilizing values seemed to be in the
balance.
Pablo Casals to Carl Seelig. Quoted in French, Einstein, 43.
Einstein Archives 34-350
Among twentieth-century men, he blends to an extraordinary
degree those highly distilled powers of
intellect, intuition, and imagination which are rarely
combined in one mind, but which, when they do
occur together, men call genius. It was all but inevitable
that this genius should appear in the field of
science, for twentieth-century civilization is fi rst
and foremost technological.
Whittaker Chambers, in a Time magazine cover story, July 1,
1946
They cheer me because they all understand me, and
they cheer you because no one understands you.
Actor Charlie Chaplin, after the premiere of City Lights in
Los Angeles in January 1931, to which Chaplin had invited
Einstein. See Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 457
His short skull seems unusually broad. His complexion
is matte light brown. Above his large sensuous
mouth is a thin black mustache. The nose is
slightly aquiline. His striking brown eyes radiate
 
494 Others on Einstein
deeply and softly. His voice is attractive, like the vibrant
note of a cello.
Einstein’s student Louis Chavan. Quoted in Max Flückiger,
Albert Einstein in Bern (1972), 11–12
*[Einstein’s death] is a loss of righteous mankind.
His contributions to science are epoch-making. He
loved science and human beings. . . . He strove untiringly
for the cause of peace, democracy, and freedom.
With the greatest grief, the Chinese people
mourn this outstanding scientist and great soldier
for the cause of human peace.
Peiyuan Chou, president of the Chinese Physical Society,
People’s Daily (Beijing), April 21, 1955. Quoted in Hu, China
and Albert Einstein, 144
*Albert Einstein Held Me in His Arms
 by David Clewell
although my parents didn’t know it at the time.
And if I knew anything, even on some vaguely
molecular level,
I surely wasn’t talking. No one was the wiser,
except
for Einstein, of course, taken with my small
charms.
He was crazy about how I couldn’t stop smiling,
drooling in my carriage on a Sunday afternoon in
Princeton—the town my mother loved just
driving to and getting out and
 
Others on Einstein 495
losing herself in, absolutely smitten. And my
pedestrian father
was crazy about my mother, so even if that meant
another goddamn trip to Highfalutinsville, New
Jersey,
he’d be there without fail, forever along for the
ride.
The way I fi nally heard it, Einstein was on his
knees
in a sweatshirt, rumpled chinos, and sneakers,
pulling weeds—
Merely being himself, my father would say later,
utterly impressed.
Einstein had that down to a science at 112 Mercer,
the unassuming
white frame house where he cultivated fl owers,
where he played violin
precisely in sync with his favorite recordings late
into the night.
Where he famously met with Bertrand Russell,
Kurt Gödel, and
Wolfgang Pauli for philosophic forays into the
schnapps, then inevitably higher mathematics.
But on that one historic Sunday in the spring of my
fi rst year,
Einstein himself welcomed the unrenowned likes
of my mother and father.
This twentieth-century giant picked me up with
some easy peekaboo
 
496 Others on Einstein
small talk in the last of the afternoon’s fading light
until, eventually, genius
or no genius, I couldn’t take it anymore, and I
made a tiny grab
for his wildly theoretical hair. And that was pretty
much the end
of our ad hoc civilization that fl ourished for ten
Princeton minutes.
When Einstein died only six weeks later, every
newspaper ran his picture, and all at once my
father couldn’t believe it: Wasn’t that the gardener
who couldn’t get enough
of the baby? It says right here he’s Einstein, the guy who
revolutionized our thinking about time and space!
And what was that supposed to mean to him,
exactly? My father
wasn’t Einstein, but he’d thought about them
plenty, too,
deciding in his lifetime he wasn’t about to get
enough of either one.
For years my parents never said a word about that
day, as if
to remember it out loud would have been
somehow unseemly—
a kind of bragging they never much went in for—
rather than a celebration
of wonderful dumb-luck Sunday driving, like
every happy accident
in the history of science or in those classic, unlikely
stories
 
Others on Einstein 497
we can’t help going back to for their mythic staying
power. So now let me
put it this way: Albert Einstein held me in his arms
before he died.
Sooner or later we’re all trying to explain our
particle selves
in light of our own cockeyed theories of relativity.
Someone in my family—my mother or my father,
maybe me—
had to embellish at least some of the truth that
comes, fi nally,
here at the end:
my mother’s horrifi ed
that I’ve yanked poor Einstein’s hair, and she
resigns herself,
sighing, It’s time to go. To prove there are no hard
feelings,
he says something Einsteinian, like Yes, but what is
time?—
which my father misunderstands as a question he
can actually answer
at that very minute, so he says, 5:00. And before I
know it,
because I am far too young to realize much of
anything,
everyone’s in a sudden hurry back into their
uncertain futures,
as if this whole thing never quite honestly
happened, and in no time
 
498 Others on Einstein
it’s fi fty years later, and I’m the one still alive, all
that’s left
of the story, telling myself: Yes, it did. No, it didn’t.
No, it did.
The poem fi rst appeared in the Summer 2006 issue of The
Georgia Review. Thanks to Judith May for sending it to me.
Reprinted with permission of David Clewell.
His eyes watered almost continually; even in moments
of laughter he would wipe away a tear. . . .
The contrast between his soft speech and ringing
laughter was enormous. . . . Every time he made a
point that he liked, or heard something that appealed
to him, he would burst into a booming laughter
that would echo from the walls.
From I. Bernard Cohen, “Einstein’s Last Interview,” April
1955. Published in Scientifi c American 193, no. 1 (July 1955),
69–73; reprinted in Robinson, Einstein, 212–225
Einstein is great because he has shown us our world
in truer perspective and has helped us to understand
a little more clearly how we are related to the
universe around us.
Physics Nobelist Arthur Compton. Quoted in Cahn, Einstein,
88
I was able to appreciate the clarity of his mind, the
breadth of his information, and the profundity of
 
Others on Einstein 499
his knowledge. . . . One has every right to build the
greatest hopes on him and to see in him one of the
leading theoreticians of the future.
Marie Curie, in a letter to Pierre Weiss, November 17, 1911.
Quoted in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel,
98–99
One cannot contemplate without astonishment and
admiration work at once so profound and so powerfully
original achieved in a few years.
Prince Louis de Broglie, permanent secretary of the French
Academy of Science until his death. Quoted in Cahn, Einstein,
121
Your mere presence here undermines the class’s respect
for me.
Said to Einstein by his seventh-grade teacher, Dr. Joseph
Degenhart, who also predicted that he “would never get
anywhere in life.” In draft of a letter to Philip Frank, 1940.
Einstein Archives 71-191, where Einstein also states that he
wanted to leave the school to join his parents in Italy. See
also CPAE, Vol. 1, lxiii, for more on this topic.
The contributions which Dr. Einstein made to man’s
understanding of nature are beyond assessment in
our day. Only future generations will be competent
to grasp their full signifi cance.
Harold Dodds, president of Princeton University, 1955.
Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 122
 
500 Others on Einstein
The professor never wears socks. Even when he was
invited by Mr. Roosevelt to the White House he
didn’t wear socks.
Einstein’s secretary, Helen Dukas. Related by Philippe
Halsman in French, Einstein: A Centenary Volume, 27
Einstein was prone to talk about God so often that I
was led to suspect he was a disguised theologian.
Writer Friedrich Dürrenmatt, in Albert Einstein: Ein
Vortrag, 12
After a careful study of the plates I am prepared to
say that there can be no doubt that they confi rm
Einstein’s prediction. A very definite result has been
obtained that light is deflected in accordance with
Einstein’s law of gravitation.
British Astronomer-Royal, Sir Frank Dyson, after the Eddington
expedition in May 1919 had confi rmed Einstein’s
general theory of relativity. Observatory 32 (1919), 391
Dr. Einstein the scientist and Einstein the Jew represent
a perfect harmony. These considerations,
added to his deep emotion at the Jewish disaster in
Europe . . . , explain the ardent zeal with which he
advocated and sustained Israel’s national revival.
Abba Eban, Israel’s ambassador to the United States in the
1950s. Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 92
Here we have nothing but people who love you and
not just your cerebral cortex.
 
Others on Einstein 501
Close friend Paul Ehrenfest in a letter to Einstein, September
8, 1919
*[Einstein is] one of the wonders of Nature . . . [and]
a marvelous interweaving of simplicity and subtlety,
of strength and tenderness, of honesty and humor,
of profundity and serenity.
Quoted by Martin Klein in The Lesson of Quantum Theory
(North Holland, 1986), 329
*Intellecual women did not attract him. Out of pity
he was attracted to women who did manual work.
Elsa Einstein, Albert’s second wife; said to the attractive
Vera Weizmann, wife of Chaim Weizmann. Quoted in The
New Palestine, April 1, 1921, 1. In fact, Einstein had affairs
with several intelligent women.
God has put so much into him that is beautiful, and
I find him wonderful, even though life at his side is
debilitating and diffi cult in every respect.
Elsa Einstein, in a letter to Hermann Struck and wife, 1929.
Quoted in Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 429
It is not ideal to be the wife of a genius. Your life
does not belong to you. It seems to belong to everyone
else. Nearly every minute of the day I give to
my husband, and that means to the public.
Elsa Einstein. Quoted in her obituary in the New York Times,
December 22, 1936, two days after her death
 
502 Others on Einstein
Oh, my husband does that on the back of an old
envelope!
Elsa Einstein, after a host at Mount Wilson Observatory
in California explained to her that the giant telescope is
used to fi nd out the shape of the universe. Reported by
Bennett Cerf in Try and Stop Me (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1944). Also in The Folio Book of Humorous Anecdotes
(2005)
Probably the only project he ever gave up on was
me. He tried to give me advice, but he soon discovered
that I was too stubborn and that he was just
wasting his time.
Hans Albert Einstein in the New York Times, July 27, 1973.
Quoted in Pais, Einstein Lived Here, 199
He was very fond of nature. He did not care for
large, impressive mountains, but he liked surroundings
that were gentle and colorful and gave one
lightness of spirit.
Hans Albert Einstein. Quoted in an interview with Bernard
Mayes, in Whitrow, Einstein, 21
He often told me that one of the most important
things in his life was music. Whenever he felt he had
come to the end of the road or into a difficult situation
in his work, he would take refuge in music and
that would usually resolve all his diffi culties.
Ibid.
 
Others on Einstein 503
His work habits were rather strange. . . . Even when
there was a lot of noise, he could lie down on the
sofa, pick up a pen and paper, precariously balance
an inkwell on the backrest, and engross himself in
a problem so much so that the background noise
stimulated rather than disturbed him.
Maja Einstein. See CPAE, Vol. 1, lxiv
*Did you know that I was in the same hospital as Albert?
I was allowed to see him twice more and talk
to him for a few hours. . . . I did not recognize him at
fi rst—he was so changed by the pain and blood de-
fi ciency. But his personality was the same as ever.
He was . . . completely in command of himself with
regard to his condition; he spoke with a profound
serenity—even with a touch of humor—about the
doctors and awaited his end as an imminent natural
phenomenon. As fearless as he had been all his life,
so he faced death humbly and quietly.
Margot Einstein in a letter to Hedi Born, after April 1955.
See Born, Born-Einstein Letters, 229
When one was with him on the sailboat, you felt
him as an element. He had something so natural
and strong in him because he was himself a piece of
nature. . . . He sailed like Odysseus.
Margot Einstein, May 4, 1978, in an interview with Jamie
Sayen, in Sayen, Einstein in America, 132
 
504 Others on Einstein
No other man contributed so much to the vast expansion
of twentieth-century knowledge.
Statement by President Dwight D. Eisenhower upon Einstein’s
death. Quoted in Einstein’s obituary in the New York
Times, April 19, 1955
In view of his radical background, this office would
not recommend the employment of Dr. Einstein, on
matters of a secret nature, without a very careful investigation,
as it seems unlikely that a man of his
background could, in such a short time, become a
loyal American citizen.
Recommendation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), which had never been informed of Einstein’s letter
to President Roosevelt warning him about the possibility
of the Germans’ building a bomb. Quoted by Richard
Schwartz in Isis 80 [1989], 281–284. See also Rowe and
Schulmann, Einstein on Politics, 59
*In the case of someone like Einstein we cannot
help but feel that there is indeed an inner and necessary
connection between the extraordinary theoretical
simplicity of his work and the personal simplicity
of the man himself. We feel that only someone
himself so simple could have conceived such ideas.
Henry LeRoy Finch of Sarah Lawrence College, June 1970. In
Introduction to Moszkowski, Conversations with Einstein, xxiii
*He was as interested in physiques as in physics.
Heard by a viewer on Fox News, ca. July 2006
 
Others on Einstein 505
Einstein’s conversation was often a combination of
inoffensive jokes and penetrating ridicule so that
some people could not decide whether to laugh or
to feel hurt. . . . Such an attitude often appeared to
be an incisive criticism, and sometimes even created
an impression of cynicism.
Philipp Frank in Frank, Einstein: His Life and Times, 77
He, who had always had something of a bohemian
in him, began to lead a middle-class life . . . in a
household such as was typical of a well-to-do Berlin
family. . . . When one entered . . . one found that Einstein
still remained a “foreigner” in such a surrounding—a
bohemian guest in a middle-class home.
Ibid., 124
He is cheerful, assured, and courteous, understands
as much of psychology as I do of physics, and so we
had a pleasant chat.
Sigmund Freud, 1926, on a visit to Berlin, where he met
Einstein. In a letter to S. Ferenczi, January 2, 1927, in The
Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud, ed. Ernest Jones (out of
print)
[I have finished writing] the tedious and sterile socalled
discussion with Einstein.
Sigmund Freud to Max Eitingon, September 8, 1932, on
Freud and Einstein’s correspondence published by the
League of Nations in 1933 as Why War? In ibid., 175
 
506 Others on Einstein
Of course I always knew that you admired me only
“out of politeness,” and that you are convinced of
very few of my assertions. . . . I hope that by the time
you have reached my age you will have become a
disciple of mine.
From Sigmund Freud to Einstein, May 3, 1936, replying to
Einstein’s letter congratulating Freud on his eightieth
birthday. In Letters of Sigmund Freud, ed. Ernst L. Freud
(New York: Basic Books, 1960). Einstein Archives 32-567
Einstein’s fiddling was like that of a lumberjack
sawing a log.
Comment by professional violinist Walter Friedrich.
Quoted in Herneck, Einstein privat (Berlin, 1978), 129
Of course, the old man agrees with almost anything
nowadays.
Cosmologist George Gamow. Written on the bottom of a
letter from Einstein of August 4, 1948, in which Einstein
states that one of Gamow’s ideas is probably correct. In
Frederick Reines, ed., Cosmology, Fusion and Other Matters
(Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 1972), 310
Mankind has lost its finest son, whose mind reached
out to the ends of the universe but whose heart
overfl owed with concern for the peace of the world
and the well-being, not of humanity as an abstraction,
but of ordinary men and women everywhere.
Israel Goldstein, president of the American Jewish Congress.
Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 122
 
Others on Einstein 507
I think it was his sense of reverence.
Dean Ernest Gordon of Princeton University’s chapel,
when asked how he would explain Einstein’s combination
of great intellect with apparent simplicity. Quoted by Richards,
“Reminiscences,” in Einstein as I Knew Him
*Your visit [to England] has had more tangible results
in improving here the relations between our
two countries than any other single event. Your
name is a power in our country.
Lord Richard B. S. Haldane, June 26, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12,
Doc. 159
A man distinguished by his desire, if possible, to efface
himself and yet impelled by the unmistakable
power of genius which would not allow the individual
of whom it had taken possession to rest for
one moment.
Lord Haldane. Quoted in The Times (London), June 14, 1921
Einstein has called forth a greater revolution in
thought than even Copernicus, Galileo, or Newton
himself.
Lord Haldane. Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 10
Someone told me that each equation I included in a
book would halve its sales. I therefore resolved not
to have any equations at all. In the end, however, I
did put in one equation, Einstein’s famous equation,
 
508 Others on Einstein
E  mc2. I hope that will not scare off half my potential
readers.
Stephen Hawking in Hawking, A Brief History of Time
 (London: Bantam, 1988), vi
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Einstein was not a handsome fellow
Nobody ever called him Al
He had a long moustache to pull on, it was yellow
I don’t believe he ever had a girl
One thing he missed out in his theory
Of time and space and relativity
Is something that makes it very clear
He was never gonna score like you and me
He didn’t know about
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
I had a dangerous liaison
To have been found out would’ve been a disgrace
We had to rendezvous some days on
the corner of an undiscovered place
We got sick of chat chat chatter
And the look upon everybody’s face
But all that doesn’t not anti-matter now
We’ve found ourselves a black hole out in space
And we’re talking about
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
 
Others on Einstein 509
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Copernicus had those Renaissance ladies
Crazy about his telescope
And Galileo had a name that made his
Reputation higher than his hopes
Did none of those astronomers discover
While they were staring out into the dark
That what a lady looks for in her lover
Is Charm, Strangeness and Quark
And we’re talking about
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Quark, Strangeness and Charm
Lyrics from the 1977 song by the British rock group
Hawkwind. Thanks to Trevor Lipscombe for sending it
to me. © 1977 Anglo Rock, Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Not yet hanged.
The Hitler regime’s caption under the photo of Einstein in
its offi cial book of photographs of its “enemies of the
state,” 1933. A bounty of 20,000 marks had been put on his
head. See Sayen, Einstein in America, 17
The essence of Einstein’s profundity lay in his simplicity;
and the essence of his science lay in his
artistry—his phenomenal sense of beauty.
Banesh Hoffmann in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and
Rebel, 3
 
510 Others on Einstein
When it became clear that [we could not solve a
problem], Einstein would stand up quietly and say,
in his quaint English, “I vill a little t’ink.” So saying
he would pace up and down or walk around in circles,
all the time twirling a lock of his long, graying
hair around his fi nger.
Banesh Hoffmann. Recollection quoted in Whitrow, Einstein,
75
He was one of the greatest scientists the world has
ever known, yet if I had to convey the essence of Albert
Einstein in a single word, I would choose
simplicity.
Banesh Hoffman, opening words in “My Friend, Albert
Einstein,” Reader’s Digest, January 1968
The “Great Relative.”
Name given to Einstein by the Hopi Indians on his visit to
the Grand Canyon of the United States, February 28, 1931,
on his return trip by train from California to New York. Recounted
in A&E Television’s Einstein biography, VPI International,
1991. Also reported by Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 640
As Time Goes By
This day and age we’re living in
Gives cause for apprehension
With speed and new invention
And things like fourth dimension.
Yet we get a trifl e weary
 
Others on Einstein 511
With Mr. Einstein’s theory.
So we must get down to earth at times
Relax relieve the tension.
And no matter what the progress
Or what may yet be proved
The simple facts of life are such
They cannot be removed.
You must remember this
A kiss is just a kiss, a sigh is just a sigh.
The fundamental things apply
As time goes by.
From the song “As Time Goes By,” lyrics and music by
Herman Hupfeld, made famous by the long-running British
television series of that title, starring Dame Judi Dench,
and the fi lm Casablanca (1942). The fi rst three verses, which
pertain to Einstein, have been virtually unknown. (© 1931
[Renewed] Warner Bros. Inc. All rights administered by
WB Music Corp. All rights reserved. Used by permission of
Alfred Publishing Co., Inc., Los Angeles.)
Einstein gave his wife the greatest care and sympathy.
But in this atmosphere of approaching death,
Einstein remained serene and worked constantly.
Leopold Infeld, on Einstein’s coping with wife Elsa’s terminal
illness of heart and kidney disease. In Infeld, The
Quest, 282
The greatness of Einstein lies in his tremendous imagination,
in the unbelievable obstinacy with which he
pursues his problems.
Ibid., 208
 
512 Others on Einstein
One of my colleagues in Princeton asked me: “If
Einstein dislikes his fame and would like to increase
his privacy, why does he . . . wear his hair long, a
funny leather jacket, no socks, no suspenders, no
ties?” The answer is simple. The idea is to restrict his
needs and, by this restriction, increase his freedom.
We are slaves of millions of things. . . . Einstein tried
to reduce them to the absolute minimum. Long hair
minimized the need for the barber. Socks can be
done without. One leather jacket solves the coat
problems for many years.
Ibid., 293
For Einstein, life is an interesting spectacle that he
views with only slight interest, never torn by the
tragic emotions of love or hatred. . . . The great intensity
of Einstein’s thought is directed outside toward
the world of phenomena.
Infeld, Einstein, 123
If Einstein were to enter your room at a party and he
were introduced to you as a “Mr. Eisenstein” of
whom you knew nothing, you would still be fascinated
by the brilliance of his eyes, by his shyness
and gentleness, by his delightful sense of humor, by
the fact that he can twist platitudes into wisdom. . . .
You feel that before you is a man who thinks for
himself. . . . He believes what you tell him because
 
Others on Einstein 513
he is kind, because he wishes to be kind, and because
it is much easier to believe than to disbelieve.
Ibid., 128
*Einstein’s English was quite simple and consisted
of about three hundred words, which he pronounced
very weirdly.
In Leopold Infeld, Leben mit Einstein (Vienna: Europa Verlag,
1969), 73. Translated in Neffe, Einstein, 35
*In matters of logic and contemplation, Einstein understood
everyone quite well, but he had a much
harder time grasping emotional issues. It was diffi -
cult for him to imagine impulses and feelings unrelated
to his own life.
Ibid., 54. Translated in Neffe, Einstein, 372
Is E  mc2 a sexed equation? . . . Perhaps it is. Let us
make the hypothesis that it is insofar as it privileges
the speed of light over other speeds that are vitally
necessary to us. What seems to me to indicate the
possible sexed nature of the equation is not directly
its uses by nuclear weapons, rather it is having privileged
what goes the fastest.
From an article by feminist Luce Irigaray, “Is the Subject of
Science Sexed?” Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy 2,
no. 3 (1987), 65–87. Cited in Francis Wheen, How MumboJumbo
Conquered the World: A Short History of Modern Delusions
(London: Fourth Estate, 2004), 88
 
514 Others on Einstein
Einstein’s attention was far from the macaroni we
were eating.
Russian physicist A. F. Joffe, after discussions of their mutual
work during dinnertime at Einstein’s home in Berlin.
Recalled in Die Wahrheit (Berlin), March 15–16, 1969
Einstein had very few hobbies. One was puzzles,
and he got the most amazing ones from all over the
world. . . . I brought him the famous Chinese Cross,
one of the most complicated puzzles to put together.
He solved it in three minutes.
Friend Alice Kahler, quoted in the Princeton Recollector
(1985), 7. See Roboz Einstein, Hans Albert Einstein, 38
With all his phenomenal intellect, he is still a naïve
and altogether spontaneous human being.
Friend Erich Kahler, 1954. Einstein Archives 38-279
I can still see you . . . your kind face still sparkling
with delight! This [childlike cheerfulness] seems to
me a fine symbol of how well you will exert a lasting
infl uence on scientifi c life here.
From Heike Kamerlingh Onnes, February 8, 1920. CPAE,
Vol. 9, Doc. 304
You’d better watch out, you’d better take care,
Albert says E equals m c square.
From the song “Einstein A-go-go,” by the pop group
Landscape
 
Others on Einstein 515
It is as important an event as would be the transfer
of the Vatican from Rome to the New World. The
pope of physics has moved, and the United States
will now become the center of the natural sciences.
Paul Langevin, on Einstein’s move to America. Quoted in
Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 227
Anyone who has had the pleasure of being close to
Einstein knows that he is not surpassed by anyone
in respecting the intellectual property of others, in
personal modesty, and in his distaste for publicity.
Max von Laue, Walther Nernst, and Heinrich Rubens, in a
joint declaration of support for Einstein as anti-Semitism
and anti-relativism were spreading among German physicists.
Tägliche Rundschau, August 26, 1920
Virtually nothing but Einstein is being talked about
here [in England], and if he were to come over now,
I think he would be celebrated like a victorious general.
The fact that a German’s theory has been con-
fi rmed by observations made by the English has, as
is becoming more obvious every day, brought the
possibility of cooperation between these nations far
closer. Thus Einstein, quite apart from the high scientifi
c value of his inspired theory, has done an inestimable
service to humankind.
Robert Lawson, who later translated the U.K. edition of The
Meaning of Relativity (1922), in a letter to Arnold Berliner,
who repeated it in a letter to Einstein on November 29,
1919; on the reception of the confi rmation of general
 
516 Others on Einstein
relativity theory. Lawson was a lecturer in physics at the
University of Sheffi eld. Einstein Archives 7-004
*The foremost example of the damaging influence
upon natural science from the Jewish side was presented
by Mr. Einstein, with his “theories” mathematically
blundered together out of good, pre-existing
knowledge and his own arbitrary garnishes, theories
which are now gradually decaying, which is the
fate of procreations alien to nature. In the process,
one cannot spare researchers, even those with genuine
achievements, from the charge that they indeed
fi rst let the “relativity-Jews” become established in
Germany. They did not see—nor did they want to
see—how very erroneous it was, even in a nonscholarly
connection, to consider especially this Jew
as a “good German.”
German physicist and winner of the 1905 Nobel Prize,
Philipp Lenard, in Völkischer Beobachter 46 (May 13,
1933)
Jewish physics can best and most justly be characterized
by recalling the activity of one who is probably
its most prominent representative, the pureblooded
Jew, Albert Einstein. His relativity theory
was supposed to transform all of physics, but when
faced with reality it did not have a leg to stand on. In
contrast to the intractable and solicitous desire for
truth in the Aryan scientist, the Jew lacks to a striking
degree any comprehension of truth.
 
Others on Einstein 517
Philipp Lenard, in his book, German Physics (Munich:
Lehmann’s Verlag, 1936). Earlier in the century, Lenard and
Einstein had had great respect for each other, then came
into confl ict over the general theory of relativity. Lenard’s
experiments on the photoelectric effect had led Einstein toward
the hypothesis of light quanta.
With Albert Einstein died someone who vindicated
the honor of mankind and whose name will never
be forgotten.
Thomas Mann, “On the Death of Albert Einstein,” in Autobiographisches
(Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Bücherei, 1968)
It was interesting to see them together—Tagore, the
poet with the head of a thinker, and Einstein, the
thinker with the head of a poet. It seemed to an observer
as though two planets were engaged in a chat.
Journalist Dmitri Marianoff, Margot Einstein’s husband, to
the New York Times, on his observations of a conversation
between Einstein and Indian poet, musician, and mystic
Rabindranath Tagore on July 14, 1930. See Tagore, “Farewell
to the West” (1930–1931), 294–295; idem, The Religion
of Man (New York: Macmillan, 1931), Appendix 2, 221–225
My husband is in Salzburg at present at a meeting of
German scientists, where he will present a lecture.
He now belongs to the circle of the most outstanding
physicists of German origin. I am very happy
about his success, which he really deserves.
Mileva Einstein-Mari´c to Helene Savi´c, September 3, 1909.
In Roboz Einstein, Hans-Albert Einstein, 95
 
518 Others on Einstein
Albert is now a very famous physicist and respected
in the world of physics. . . . Albert has devoted himself
completely to physics and it seems to me that he
has little time if any for the family.
Ibid., March 12, 1913, 96
Anyone who advises Americans to keep secret information
which they may have about spies and
saboteurs is himself an enemy of America.
Senator Joseph McCarthy, regarding Einstein’s advocacy of
refusing to testify at the House Un-American Activities
Committee hearings. New York Times, June 14, 1953
Our travellers tell us that there is complete ignorance
in the public mind as to what relativity means.
A good many people seem to think that the book
deals with the relations between the sexes.
From Methuen publishers in England to Robert Lawson,
Einstein’s translator, February 1920. See CPAE, Vol. 9,
Doc. 326
The mathematical education of the young physicist
Albert Einstein was not very solid, which I am in a
good position to evaluate since he obtained it from
me in Zurich a long time ago.
Hermann Minkowski, quoted on the Internet, www.gap
.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Quotations/Minkowski.html
(I usually don’t rely on the Internet’s undocumented quotations,
but I hope this one is correct because I like it.)
 
Others on Einstein 519
He wore his usual jersey, baggy pants, and slippers.
What especially struck me as he approached the
doorway was that he seemed not to walk but to
glide in a sort of undeliberate dance. It was enchanting.
And there he was, bright, sad eyes, cascading
white hair, with a smile of greeting on his face, a
fi rm handshake.
From anthropologist Ashley Montagu’s “Conversations
with Einstein,” Science Digest, July 1985
The great scientist of our age, he was truly a seeker
after truth who would not compromise with evil or
untruth.
Jawaharlal Nehru, prime minister of India, 1955
*I believe that so far as the development of physics
is concerned, we can be very happy to have found
so original a young thinker. . . . Einstein’s “quantum
hypothesis” is probably one of the most remarkable
ever devised. . . . If it is false, well, then it will remain
for all time “a beautiful memory.”
German physical chemist and 1920 Nobel laureate Walther
Nernst, in a March 17, 1910, letter to Arthur Schuster.
CPAE, Vol. 3, xxiii, n. 36. Translated in Neffe, Einstein, 330
When he offered his last important work to the publishers,
he warned them that there were no more
than twelve persons in the whole world who would
understand it, but the publishers took the risk.
 
520 Others on Einstein
This false report by a New York Times reporter, November 10,
1919, regarding the general theory of relativity, became established
in the Einstein mythology. On December 3, 1919,
another New York Times reporter asked if this statement was
true, upon which “the doctor laughed good-humoredly.”
See Fölsing, Albert Einstein, 447, 451
It flashed to the minds of men the most spectacular
proof of the Einstein Theory of Relativity, which
provided the key to the vast treasure house of energy
within the atom.
New York Times, August 7, 1945, on the atom bomb
This man changed thinking about the world as only
Newton and Darwin changed it.
In the New York Times after Einstein’s death, 1955. Quoted
in Cahn, Einstein, 120
“For his unique services to theoretical physics and
in particular for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric
effect.”
Nobel Prize Committee, offi cial citation for the Nobel Prize
in Physics, 1921. Note that no mention was made of relativity
theory, which was still a controversial topic at the time.
Einstein had been nominated for the prize each year from
1910 to 1918 except for 1911 and 1915. See Pais, Subtle Is the
Lord, 505
He has a quiet way of walking, as if he is afraid of
alarming the truth and frightening it away.
 
Others on Einstein 521
Japanese cartoonist Ippei Okamoto on Einstein’s visit to
Japan, November 1922. See manuscript, “Einstein’s 1922
Visit to Japan,” in Einstein Archives 36-409
*Few men have contributed so much to our understanding
of the physical world. . . . We see in Einstein,
especially those who have come to know him a little,
those personal qualities that are the counterpart of
great work: selflessness, humor, and deep kindness.
Robert Oppenheimer, March 16, 1939, in a radio address on
the occasion of Einstein’s sixtieth birthday. Reprinted in
Science 89 (1939), 335–336
It is not too soon to start to dispel the clouds of myth
and to see the great mountain peak that these clouds
hide. As always, the myth has its charms, but the
truth is far more beautiful.
Robert Oppenheimer on Einstein, 1965. Quoted in the Los
Angeles Times, editorial, March 14, 1979, on the centennial
of Einstein’s birth
He was almost wholly without sophistication and
wholly without worldliness. . . . There was always
in him a powerful purity at once childlike and profoundly
stubborn.
Robert Oppenheimer, in “On Albert Einstein,” New York
Review of Books, March 17, 1966
*He spent [his last 25 years] first trying to prove
that the quantum theory had inconsistencies in it.
 
522 Others on Einstein
No one could have been more ingenious in thinking
up unexpected and clever examples; but it turned
out the inconsistencies were not there; and often their
resolution could be found in earlier work of Einstein
himself. When that did not work . . . Einstein had
simply to say that he did not like the theory.
Ibid.
*He fought with Bohr in a noble and furious way,
and he fought with the theory which he had fathered
but which he hated. It was not the first time that this
had happened in science.
Ibid.
*Even above his humanity and kindliness, even
above his immense analytical power and depth he
had a quality that made him unique. This was his
faith that there exists in the natural world an order
and a harmony and that this may be apprehended
by the mind of man.
Robert Oppenheimer in a eulogy for Einstein for the Princeton
Packet, April 1955. Oppenheimer Papers, Box 256, Library
of Congress. But according to Schweber, Einstein and
Oppenheimer, 276, “Oppenheimer made much less complimentary
statements: that Einstein had no understanding of
or interest in modern physics . . . wasting his time in trying
to unify gravitation and electromagnetism. . . . Oppenheimer
complained that even though the Institute [of Advanced
Study] had supported Einstein for twenty-fi ve
years,” he left all his papers to the Hebrew University in
Israel.
 
Others on Einstein 523
He responded with one of the most extraordinary
kinds of laughter. . . . It was rather like the barking
of a seal. It was a happy laughter. From that time on,
I would save a good story for our next meeting, for
the sheer pleasure of hearing Einstein’s laugh.
Abraham Pais. Quoted in Jeremy Bernstein, Einstein (Penguin,
1978), 77
*He was the freest man I have ever known. . . . Better
than anyone before or after him, he knew how to
invent invariance principles and make use of statistical
fl uctuations.
Pais, Subtle Is the Lord, vii
What Einstein said wasn’t all that stupid.
Physicist and future Nobelist Wolfgang Pauli as a student,
after hearing Einstein, twenty years his senior, give a lecture.
Quoted in Ehlers, Liebes Hertz! 47
I’ll never forget this speech. He was like a king
who abdicated and installed me as his choice for
successor.
Wolfgang Pauli, recalling Einstein’s speech at a dinner honoring
Pauli after he won the Nobel Prize. Einstein said he is
at the end of his wisdom, and it is now up to Pauli to further
pursue a unifi ed fi eld theory. Quoted in Armin Hermann,
“Einstein und die Österreicher,” Plus Lucis, February
1995, 20–21
Doctor with the bushy head
Tell us that you’re not a Red.
 
524 Others on Einstein
Tell us that you do not eat
Capitalists in the street.
Say to us it isn’t true
You devour their children too.
Speak, oh speak, and say you’re notsky
Just a bent-space type of Trotsky.
Verse written by popular newspaper columnist H. I. Phillips
during the McCarthy era, poking fun at anti-Communist
opposition to Einstein’s admittance to the United States
two decades earlier. Quoted by Norman F. Stanley in Physics
Today, November 1995, 118
You have long dwelt in our midst as a very near
and personal reminder of our highest aspirations;
for this gentle and all-pervasive influence we are
particularly grateful to you.
From a seventy-fi fth birthday letter from the Physics Department
at Princeton University, signed by Robert Dicke,
Eugene Wigner, John Wheeler, Valentin Bargmann, Arthur
Wightman, George Reynolds, Frank Shoemaker, Eric Rogers,
Sam Treiman, and others, March 12, 1954. Einstein Archives
30-1242
In boldness it exceeds anything so far achieved in
speculative natural science, in philosophical cognition
theory. Non-Euclidean geometry is child’s play
by comparison.
Max Planck on Einstein’s defi nition of time, in a lecture delivered
at Columbia University, Spring 1909 (published
Leipzig, 1910), 117ff.
 
Others on Einstein 525
Even though in political matters a deep gulf divides
us, I am also absolutely certain that in the centuries
to come Einstein will be celebrated as one of the
brightest stars that ever shined on our academy.
Max Planck to Heinrich von Ficker, March 31, 1933, on Einstein’s
resignation from the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
Quoted in Christa Kirsten and H.-J. Treder, Albert Einstein
in Berlin, 1913–1933 (Berlin, 1979)
*It is difficult to make him your enemy, but once he
has cast you out of his heart, you are done for as far
as he is concerned.
Einstein’s doctor János Plesch, quoted in Herneck, Einstein
privat (Berlin, 1976), 89
Einstein loved women, and the commoner and sweatier
and smellier they were, the better he liked them.
Peter Plesch, quoting his father, János. In Highfi eld and
Carter, The Private Lives of Albert Einstein, 206
What we must particularly admire in him is the facility
with which he adapts himself to new concepts
and that he knows how to draw from them every
conclusion.
Henri Poincaré, 1911. Quoted in Hoffmann, Albert Einstein:
Creator and Rebel, 99
*Einstein wanted a physical world that was unproblematically
objective and deterministic, hence his
rejection of modern quantum theory. This stance
 
526 Others on Einstein
made him the last of the great ancients, rather than
the fi rst of the moderns.
Physicist and Anglican priest John Polkinghorne, quoted in
Science and Theology News (online), November 18, 2005
*Nature and Nature’s laws lay hid in night.
God said, Let Newton Be! and all was light.
It did not last: the Devil howling “Ho!
Let Einstein be!” restored the status quo.
God rolled his dice, to Einstein’s great dismay:
“Let Feynman Be!” and all was clear as day.
The fi rst two lines were by Alexander Pope, in Epitaph XII
for Sir Isaac Newton (see The Works of Alexander Pope
[1797], Vol. 2, 403), to which Sir John Collings Squire, the
literary editor of The New Statesman and The London Mercury,
added the second couplet in his “Continuation of
Pope on Newton,” in Poems (1926). The third was added by
historian of science Stephen Brush in his review, “Feynman’s
Success: Demystifying Quantum Mechanics,” of Jagdesh
Mehra’s biography of Richard Feynman (The Beat of a
Different Drum, 1994) in American Scientist 83 (September–
October 1995), 477. (My thanks to Professor Brush for clarifying
the provenance of the fi nal couplet.)
A great transformer of natural science has been lost.
Pravda, Moscow, after Einstein’s death. Quoted in Cahn,
Einstein, 121
Instead of having our boys come home, this foreignborn
agitator would have us plunge into another
European war in order to further the spread of
 
Others on Einstein 527
communism throughout the world. . . . It is about
time the American people got wise to Einstein. In
my opinion he is violating the law and ought to be
prosecuted. . . . I call upon the Department of Justice
to put a stop to this man Einstein.
Congressman John Rankin (D-Miss.), Congressional RecordHouse,
October 25, 1945. Facsimile reprinted in Cahn, Einstein,
101. Einstein had sent a letter to Congress asking for
money for the American Committee for Spanish Freedom to
carry on the fight for breaking relations with Franco’s Spain,
which Rankin and others considered a Communist plot.
I could hardly suggest that he spruce himself up for
my camera, though on several occasions I did try
surreptitiously to brush his hair back behind his
ears—accidentally, as it were—while arranging the
lights behind his hair. But the unruly swatch always
sprang forward again with a stubbornness of its
own. I gave up on his hair, but his feet continued to
bother me. . . . Professor Einstein seldom wore socks.
Although I tried to take all his pictures from the
knees or waist up, it was difficult to keep my eyes
off those bare ankles.
Princeton University photographer Alan Richards, who
had been called to take Einstein’s offi cial birthday portrait.
See Richards, “Reminiscences,” in Einstein as I Knew Him
Once, when a company had sent him a very sizable
consulting fee, he used the check for a bookmark,
then lost the book.
Ibid.
 
528 Others on Einstein
He simplified his concerns in order to spend his
time wisely. . . . This same uncluttered attitude allowed
him to speak directly, with unaffected kindness
and respect, to every human being he met,
child or adult, ignoring externals.
Ibid.
*Einstein is more dangerous as a proponent of a
cause than an enemy of that cause. His genius is
limited to science. In other matters he is a fool. . . .
He should just stay out of it! He is made only for his
equations.
Pacifi st Romain Rolland in a letter to writer Stefan Zweig,
September 15, 1933. Quoted in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert
Einstein, 386–387
Einstein, a genius in science, is weak, indecisive,
and contradictory outside his own fi eld. . . . His continuous
change of opinion and . . . change in his actions
are worse than the inflexible obstinacy of a declared
enemy.
Pacifi st Romain Rolland, diary entry of September 1933.
Quoted in Nathan and Norden, Einstein on Peace, 233
*Sometimes you felt Einstein was creating his ideas
while he spoke, forgetting that . . . he had an audience.
Then, when he realized we were present, he
gave one of his striking and drastic, always appropriate
similes.
 
Others on Einstein 529
Ilse Rosenthal-Schneider, his former student, in Reality and
Scientifi c Truth, 91
To Einstein, hair and violin,
We give our fi nal nod.
He’s understood by just two folks:
Himself . . . and sometimes God.
An ode by Jack Rossetter, sent by a reader from India
In an age when physics has produced a large number
of great men and a bewildering variety of new
facts and theories, Einstein remains supreme in the
breadth and depth and comprehensiveness of his
constructions.
Bertrand Russell, ca. 1928, in an unpublished article in the
Russell Archive, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. Einstein Archives 33-154
Einstein was indisputably one of the greatest men of
our time. He had, in a high degree, the simplicity
characteristic of the best men in science—a simplicity
which comes of a single-minded desire to know and
understand things that are completely impersonal.
Bertrand Russell. In The New Leader, May 30, 1955
He removed the mystery from gravitation, which
everybody since Newton had accepted, with a reluctant
feeling, as unintelligible.
Bertrand Russell. Quoted in Whitrow, Einstein, 22
 
530 Others on Einstein
Of all the public figures that I have known, Einstein
was the one who commanded my most wholehearted
admiration. . . . Einstein was not only a
great scientist, he was a great man. He stood for
peace in a world drifting towards war. He remained
sane in a mad world, and liberal in a world of
fanatics.
Ibid., 90
One student, by name of Einstein, even sparkled in
rendering an adagio from a Beethoven sonata with
deep understanding.
Music inspector J. Ryffel of the Aargau cantonal school in
evaluating Einstein’s performance at a fi nal music exam at
the school, ca. March 31, 1896. CPAE, Vol. 1, Doc. 17
For heaven’s sake, Albert, can’t you count?
Pianist Artur Schnabel, after Einstein made several wrong
entrances in a quartet rehearsal at the Mendelssohn villa in
Berlin in the 1920s. Recalled by Mike Lipskin and quoted by
Herb Caen in the San Francisco Chronicle, February 3, 1996
Even though without writing each other, we are in
mental communication; for we respond to our
dreadful times in the same way and tremble together
for the future of mankind. . . . I like it that we
have the same given name.
Albert Schweitzer. In a letter to Einstein, February 20, 1955.
Einstein Archives 33-236
 
Others on Einstein 531
Einstein
A little mousey man he was
With board, and chalk in hand;
And millions were awestruck because
They couldn’t understand.
Said he: “E equals mc 2:
I’ll prove it true.
No doubt you can, you marvel man,
But will it serve our good?
Will it prolong our living span
And multiply our food?
Will it bring peace between the nations
To make equations?
Our thanks are due no doubt to you
For truth beyond our ken;
But after all what did you do
To ease the lot of men?
How can a thousand “yous” be priced
Beside a Christ?
Poet Robert Service, who may not have been aware of
Einstein’s humanitarian deeds. From Later Collected Verse
(New York: Dodd, Mead, 1965). (Used by permission of
the Estate of Robert Service, given by M. William
Krasilovsky)
A powerful searchlight of the human mind, piercing
by its rays the darkness of the unknown, has suddenly
been extinguished. The world has lost its
 
532 Others on Einstein
foremost genius and the Jewish people its most illustrious
son in the present generation.
Moishe Sharrett, prime minister of Israel, 1955. Quoted in
Cahn, Einstein, 120
You are the only sort of man in whose existence I see
much hope for in this deplorable world.
George Bernard Shaw, in a postcard of December 2, 1924.
Einstein Archives 33-242
Tell Einstein that I said the most convincing proof I
can adduce of my admiration for him is that his is the
only one of these portraits [of celebrities] I paid for.
George Bernard Shaw. Recalled by Archibald Henderson in
the Durham Morning Herald, August 21, 1955. Einstein Archives
33-257. Einstein’s reply: “That is very characteristic
of Bernard Shaw, who has declared that money is the most
important thing in the world.”
Ptolemy made a universe, which lasted 1400 years.
Newton, also, made a universe, which lasted 300
years. Einstein has made a universe, and I can’t tell
you how long that will last.
George Bernard Shaw, at a banquet in England honoring
Einstein. Quoted in David Cassidy, Einstein and Our World
(Humanities Press, 1995), 1. Also shown in Nova’s Einstein
biography for PBS television, 1979
There is only one fault with his cosmical religion: he
put an extra letter in the word—the letter “s.”
 
Others on Einstein 533
Bishop Fulton J. Sheen. Quoted in Clark, Einstein, 426. Even
though Sheen seems to have disapproved of his religious
views, Einstein still admired him. See Fantova, “Conversations
with Einstein,” December 13, 1953, where he praises
Sheen.
What did surprise me was his physique. He had
come in from sailing and was wearing nothing but a
pair of shorts. It was a massive body, very heavily
muscled; he was running to fat round the midriff
and in the upper arms, rather like a footballer in
middle age, but he was an unusually strong man.
C. P. Snow on his visit to Einstein in 1937. Quoted by Richard
Rhodes, The Making of the Atom Bomb (New York:
Touchstone Books, 1995)
To me, he appears as out of comparison the greatest
intellect of this century, and almost certainly
the greatest personification of moral experience. He
was in many ways different from the rest of the
species.
C. P. Snow, in “Conversations with Einstein,” quoted in
French, Einstein: A Centenary Volume, 193
I loved him and admired him profoundly for his
basic goodness, his intellectual genius and his indomitable
moral courage. In contrast to the lamentable
vacillation that characterizes most so-called intellectuals,
he fought tirelessly against injustice and
evil. He will live in the memory of future generations
 
534 Others on Einstein
not only as a scientific genius of exceptional stature
but also as an epitome of moral greatness.
Lifelong friend Maurice Solovine in his introduction to Letters
to Solovine. Quoted in Abraham Pais, “Albert Einstein
as Philosopher and Natural Scientist,” 1956
*Tall, robust, of an almost Balzacian physique, but
with a pale face of the most pure and sweet Oriental
pallor and with two deep, thoughtful and melancholy
eyes whose pupils seem to reflect all of the
spiritual defeats and ascents of past Jewish generations
that survived the exhausting tumult of martyrdom
and anxiety, Albert Einstein . . . answered my
questions with tired and kindly attention.
Aldo Sorani, in the Italian newspaper Il Messagero, October
26, 1921. CPAE, Vol. 12, Appendix G
*It was like going to tea with god, not the terrible
God of the Bible, but the little child’s father in
heaven, very kind and wise. Yet Einstein himself
was very much like a child.
Liberal journalist I. F. Stone. Quoted in Brian, Einstein, 403
He was a Zionist on general humanitarian grounds
rather than on nationalistic grounds. He felt that Zionism
was the only way in which the Jewish problem
in Europe could be settled. . . . He was never in
favor of aggressive nationalism, but he felt that a
Jewish homeland in Palestine was essential to save
 
Others on Einstein 535
the remaining Jews in Europe. . . . After the State of
Israel was established, he said that somehow he felt
happy he was not there to be involved in the deviations
from the high moral tone he detected.
Ernst Straus. Quoted in Whitrow, Einstein, 87–88
I would be unable to picture science without him.
His spirit permeates it. He makes part of my thinking
and outlook.
Albert Szent-Gyorgy, Nobel laureate in medicine and physiology.
Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 122
His shock of white hair, his burning eyes, his warm
manner again impressed me with the human character
of this man who dealt so abstractly with the
laws of geometry and mathematics. . . . There was
nothing stiff about him—there was no intellectual
aloofness. He seemed to me a man who valued
human relationships and he showed toward me a
real interest and understanding.
Indian poet, musician, artist, and mystic Rabindranath
Tagore, after his meetings with Einstein in Germany in
1930. Quoted in the New York Times, August 20, 2001
Nobody in football should be called a genius. A genius
is a guy like Norman Einstein.
Football commentator and former player Joe Theisman.
Quoted in The Book of Truly Stupid Sports Quotes (New York:
HarperCollins, 1996)
 
536 Others on Einstein
One of the greatest—perhaps the greatest—of
achievements in the history of human thought.
Joseph John Thomson, discoverer of the electron, referring
to Einstein’s work on general relativity, 1919. Quoted in
Hoffmann, Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, 132
As the century’s greatest thinker, as an immigrant
who fled from oppression to freedom, as a political
idealist, he best embodies what historians will regard
as significant about the twentieth century. And
as a philosopher with faith both in science and in the
beauty of God’s handiwork, he personifies the legacy
that has been bequeathed to the next century.
Time magazine, explaining its selection of Einstein as Person
of the Twentieth Century, January 3, 2000
He had the kind of male beauty that, especially at the
beginning of the century, caused great commotion.
Antonina Vallentin, in Le Drame d’Albert Einstein (Paris,
1954) and Das Drama Albert Einsteins (Stuttgart, 1955), 9
*You had only to see Einstein in a small sailboat to
realize the strength of the roots that bound him to a
simple open-air life. Wearing sandals and an old
sweater, his hair ruffling in the breeze, he would . . .
rock gently with the motion of the boat, completely
at one with the sail he was maneuvering. . . . As he
tugged at the sail, with his muscles protruding like
cables, . . . he might have belonged to the age of sea
 
Others on Einstein 537
gods or pirates. . . . He looked like anything in the
world but a scientist.
Antonina Vallentin, in The Drama of Albert Einstein (Doubleday,
1954), 168
*His shoulders were still robust, his bare neck strong
and round. But time had dug deep furrows on the
plump cheeks, and the lips drooped at the corners.
. . . His high forehead was deeply wrinkled. . . .
His hair was as wiry as ever, with that curious life of
its own. . . . The most moving change, however, was
in his eyes. The burning glance seemed to have
singed the skin underneath. . . . But his strength
burst forth through the eyes and triumphed over
everything that was in decline.
Ibid., 295, on seeing Einstein many years later, before his
seventieth birthday
[Einstein] acted on women as a magnet acts on iron
fi lings. But he also enjoyed the company of women
and was captivated by everything feminine.
Konrad Wachsmann, the architect of Einstein’s house in Caputh.
Quoted in Grüning, Ein Haus für Albert Einstein, 158
During our crossing, Einstein explained his theory
to me every day, and by the time we arrived I was
fully convinced he understood it.
Chaim Weizmann, Spring 1921, after he escorted Einstein
to the United States on the SS Rotterdam on behalf of a
 
538 Others on Einstein
Zionist delegation. Quoted in Seelig, Albert Einstein and die
Schweiz, 82
[Einstein] is acquiring the psychology of a prima
donna who is beginning to lose her voice.
Chaim Weizmann, 1933, in response to Einstein’s requests
for reforms at Hebrew University. Quoted in Norman Rose,
Chaim Weizmann (New York, 1986), 297
The world has lost an illustrious scientist, a great
and brave mind and a fighter for human rights. The
Jewish people have lost the brightest jewel in their
crown.
Vera Weizmann, widow of the late Israeli president, after
Einstein’s death, 1955. Quoted in Cahn, Einstein, 121
Einstein was a physicist and not a philosopher.
But the naïve directness of his questions was
philosophical.
C. F. von Weizsaecker. Quoted in P. Aichelburg and R. Sexl,
Albert Einstein (Vieweg, 1979), 159
So today, for his genius and integrity we, who inadequately
measure his power, salute the new Columbus
of science voyaging through the strange seas of
thought alone.
Dean Andrew Fleming West of Princeton University, after
reading a citation before President John Grier Hibben conferred
an honorary doctorate on Einstein, May 9, 1921
 
Others on Einstein 539
Princeton Alumni Weekly, May 11, 1921, 713–714. See also
Illy, Albert Meets America, 166
*Of all the questions with which the great thinkers
have occupied themselves in all lands and all centuries,
none has ever claimed greater primacy than the
origin of the universe, and no contributions to this
issue ever made by any man anytime have proved
themselves richer in illuminating power than those
that Einstein made.
Princeton physicist John Wheeler in “Einstein,” Biographical
Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences 51 (1980), 97
The Einstein and the Eddington
The sun was setting on the links,
The moon looked down serene,
The caddies all had gone to bed,
But still there could be seen
Two players lingering by the trap
That guards the thirteenth green.
The Einstein and the Eddington
Were counting up their score;
The Einstein’s card showed ninety-eight
And Eddington’s was more.
And both lay bunkered in the trap
And both stood there and swore.
I hate to see, the Einstein said;
Such quantities of sand;
Just why they placed a bunker here
 
540 Others on Einstein
I cannot understand.
If one could smooth this landscape out,
I think it would be grand.
If seven maids with seven mops
Would sweep the fairway clean
I’m sure that I could make this hole
In less than seventeen.
I doubt it, said the Eddington,
Your slice is pretty mean.
Then all the little golf balls came
To see what they were at,
And some of them were tall and thin
And some were short and fat,
A few of them were round and smooth,
But most of them were fl at.
The time has come, said Eddington,
To talk of many things:
Of cubes and clocks and meter-sticks
And why a pendulum swings.
And how far space is out of plumb,
And whether time has wings.
I learned at school the apple’s fall
To gravity was due,
But now you tell me that the cause
Is merely G-mu-nu,
I cannot bring myself to think
That this is really true.
You say that gravitation’s force
Is clearly not a pull.
That space is mostly emptiness,
 
Others on Einstein 541
While time is nearly full;
And though I hate to doubt your word,
It sounds like a bit of bull.
And space, it has dimensions four,
Instead of only three.
The square of the hypotenuse
Ain’t what it used to be.
It grieves me sore, the things you’ve done
To plane geometry.
You hold that time is badly warped,
That even light is bent:
I think I get the idea there,
If this is what you meant:
The mail the postman brings today,
Tomorrow will be sent.
If I should go to Timbuctoo
With twice the speed of light,
And leave this afternoon at four,
I’d get back home last night.
You’ve got it now, the Einstein said,
That is precisely right.
But if the planet Mercury
In going round the sun,
Never returns to where it was
Until its course is run,
The things we started out to do
Were better not begun.
And if before the past is through,
The future intervenes;
Then what’s the use of anything;
 
542 Others on Einstein
Of cabbages or queens?
Pray tell me what’s the bally use
Of Presidents and Deans.
The shortest line, Einstein replied,
Is not the one that’s straight;
It curves around upon itself,
Much like a fi gure eight,
And if you go too rapidly
You will arrive too late.
But Easter day is Christmas time
And far away is near,
And two and two is more than four
And over there is here.
You may be right, said Eddington,
It seems a trifl e queer.
But thank you very, very much,
For troubling to explain;
I hope you will forgive my tears,
My head begins to pain;
I feel the symptoms coming on
Of softening of the brain.
Dr. W. H. Williams, who shared an offi ce with Arthur Eddington
at the University of California at Berkeley, prepared
this verse for a faculty club dinner on the eve of Eddington’s
departure from Berkeley in 1924. This poem is, of
course, based on “The Walrus and the Carpenter” in Lewis
Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found
There (1872).
He is not a good teacher for mentally lazy gentlemen
who merely want to fill up a notebook and then
 
Others on Einstein 543
learn it by heart for an exam; he is not a smooth
talker. But anyone who wants to learn how to construct
physical ideas, carefully examine all premises,
take note of the pitfalls and problems, review the reliability
of his reflections, will find Einstein a fi rstrate
teacher.
Heinrich Zangger, in a letter to Ludwig Forrer, October 9,
1911, recommending Einstein for a post at the ETH in Zurich.
CPAE, Vol. 5, Doc. 291
An Einstein would long since have been hanged
as a mystic because for him light deflects around
corners.
Heinrich Zangger, October 17, 1919, on conditions in Russia
and referring to the recent proof of general relativity
Einstein’s [violin] playing is excellent, but he does
not deserve his world fame; there are many others
just as good.
A music critic on an early 1920s performance, unaware that
Einstein’s fame derived from physics, not music. Quoted in
Reiser, Albert Einstein, 202–203
“Prof. Einstein’s Got a New Baby: Formula Keeps
Our Man Up Nights.”
Headline of a book review of The Meaning of Relativity
which appeared in the Daily Mirror (New York), March 30,
1953. It referred to the appendix published two years before
Einstein’s death in which the physicist presented a
 
544 Others on Einstein
greatly simplifi ed derivation of the equations of general
relativity. (Contributed by Trevor Lipscombe)
Weird Math
Said Einstein, “I have an equation,
Which some might call Rabelaisian:
Let P be virginity,
Approaching infi nity,
And let U be a constant, persuasion
“Now, if P over U be inverted,
And the square root of U be inserted
X times over P,
The result, Q.E.D.,
Is a relative,” Einstein asserted
By an anonymous wag, found on the Internet, November 11,
2003
Teutonic Einstein
Here lies Einstein, an enterprising Teuton
Who, relatively speaking, silenced Newton.
Epitaph for Einstein by an unidentifi ed author. Quoted by
Ashley Montagu in “Conversations with Einstein,” Science
Digest, July 1985. Einstein might have taken issue with the
“Teuton” characterization.
The Steins (two versions)
Three wonderful people called Stein;
There’s Gert and there’s Ep and there’s Ein.
Gert writes in blank verse,
 
Others on Einstein 545
Ep’s sculptures are worse,
And nobody understands Ein.
Verse by an unidentifi ed author. Quoted in ibid.
I don’t like the family Stein!
There is Gert, there is Ep, there is Ein.
Gert’s writings are punk,
Ep’s statues are junk,
Nor can anyone understand Ein.
Rhyme current in the United States in the 1920s. Listed
in the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations (1999) under
“Anonymous”
Fast Girl
There was a young lady named Bright
Whose speed was much faster than light.
She went out one day
In a relative way
And came back the previous night.
Limerick about relativity, ca. 1919, unknown author, in New
Statesman, August 9, 1999 (found on its Web site)
And, fi nally:
All boys are idiots except for Albert Einstein.
Mary Lipscombe, age 8, to Lottie Appel, age 6, daughters
of my former colleagues Trevor and Fred, respectively.
Overheard at Princeton University Press Christmas party,
December 21, 1999
 
 
Bibliography
 
 
Abraham, Carolyn. Possessing Genius: The Bizarre Odyssey
of Einstein’s Brain. New York:
Born, Max, ed. Einstein-Born Briefwechsel, 1916–1955. Munich:
Nymphenbürger, 1969.
———. The Born-Einstein Letters. Trans. Irene Born. New
York: Macmillan, 2005.
Brian, Denis. Einstein, a Life. New York: Wiley, 1996.
Brockman, John. My Einstein: Essays by Twenty-four of the
World’s Leading Thinkers on the Man, His Work, and His
Legacy. New York: Pantheon, 2006.
Buchwald, Diana Kormos, Ze’ev Rosenkranz, et al., eds.,
The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 12, The
Berlin Years: Correspondence, January–December 1921.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2009.
(Trans. Ann Hentschel, 2009.)
Buchwald, Diana Kormos, Tilman Sauer, et al., eds., The
Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 10, The Berlin
Years: Correspondence, May–December 1920. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2006. (Trans. Ann
Hentschel, 2006.)
Buchwald, Diana Kormos, Robert Schulmann, et al., eds.
The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 9, The Berlin
Years: Correspondence, January 1919–April 1920. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004. (Trans.
Ann Hentschel, 2004.)
Cahn, William. Einstein: A Pictorial Biography. New York:
Citadel Press, 1960.
Calaprice, Alice. The Quotable Einstein. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1996.
———. The Expanded Quotable Einstein. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2000.
———. Dear Professor Einstein: Albert Einstein’s Letters to
and from Children. Foreword by Evelyn Einstein. Amherst,
N.Y.: Prometheus, 2002.
———. The Einstein Almanac. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2005.
 
Calaprice, Alice. The New Quotable Einstein. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Calaprice, Alice, and Trevor Lipscombe. Albert Einstein: A
Biography. Greenwood Biographies (For young
adults). Westport, Conn., and London: Greenwood
Press, 2005.
Cassidy, David. Einstein and Our World. Atlantic Highlands,
N.J.: Humanities Press, 1995.
Clark, Ronald W. Einstein: The Life and Times. New York:
World Publishing, 1971.
CPAE. See Stachel et al. for Vols. 1 and 2; Klein et al. for
Vol. 5; Kox et al. for Vol. 6; Janssen et al. for Vol. 7;
Schulmann et al. for Vol. 8; Buchwald et al. for Vols. 9,
10, 12.
Dukas, Helen, and Banesh Hoffmann. Albert Einstein, the
Human Side. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1979.
Dürrenmatt, Friedrich. Albert Einstein: Ein Vortrag. Zurich:
Diogenes, 1979.
Dyson, Freeman. “Writing a Foreword for Alice Calaprice’s
New Einstein Book.” Princeton University Library
Chronicle 57, no. 3 (Spring 1996), 491–502.
Ehlers, Anita. Liebes Hertz! Berlin: Birkhäuser, 1994.
Einstein, Albert. Cosmic Religion with Other Opinions and
Aphorisms. New York: Covici-Friede, 1931.
———. About Zionism. Trans. L. Simon. New York: Macmillan,
1931.
———. The World as I See It. Abridged ed. New York: Philosophical
Library, distributed by Citadel Press. Orig.
in Leach, Living Philosophies, 1931.
———. The Origins of the Theory of Relativity. Glasgow:
Jackson, Wylie, 1933.
———. Essays in Science. Trans. Alan Harris. New York:
Philosophical Library, 1934.
———. Mein Weltbild. Amsterdam: Querido Verlag, 1934.
Paperback ed., Berlin: Ullstein, 1993.
———. “Autobiographical Notes.” In Schilpp, Albert Einstein:
Philosopher-Scientist.
550 Bibliography
 
Bibliography 551
———. Out of My Later Years. Paperback ed. New York:
Wisdom Library of the Philosophical Library, 1950.
(Other editions exist as well; page numbers refer to
this edition.)
———. The Meaning of Relativity. 5th ed. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1953. Includes Appendix
to 2d ed.
———. Ideas and Opinions. Trans. Sonja Bargmann. New
York: Crown, 1954. (Other editions exist as well; page
numbers refer to this edition.)
———. Correspondance avec Michèle Besso, 1903–1955.
Paris: Hermann, 1979.
———. Albert Einstein/Mileva Mari´c: The Love Letters. Ed.
Jürgen Renn and Robert Schulmann. Trans. Shawn
Smith. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1992.
———. Einstein on Humanism. New York: Carol Publishing,
1993.
———. Letters to Solovine, 1906–1955. Trans. from the
French by Wade Baskin, with facsimile letters in German.
New York: Carol Publishing, 1993.
———. Relativity: The Special and the General Theory. London:
Routledge Classics, 2001.
Einstein, Albert, and Sigmund Freud. Why War? Paris: Institute
for Intellectual Cooperation, League of Nations,
1933.
Einstein, Albert, and Leopold Infeld. The Evolution of Physics.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1938.
Einstein: A Portrait. Introduction by Mark Winokur. Corte
Madera, Calif.: Pomegranate Artbooks, 1984.
Fantova, Johanna. “Conversations with Einstein,” October
1953–April 1955. Manuscript. Fantova Collection
on Albert Einstein. Manuscripts Division. Department
of Rare Books and Special Collections. Princeton
University Library, Princeton, N.J.
Flückiger, Max. Albert Einstein in Bern. Bern: Haupt, 1972.
Fölsing, Albrecht. Albert Einstein. Trans. Ewald Osers.
New York: Viking, 1997.
 
552 Bibliography
Frank, Philipp. Einstein: His Life and Times. New York:
Knopf, 1947, 1953.
———. Einstein: Sein Leben und seine Zeit. Braunschweig,
Germany: Vieweg, 1979.
French, A. P., ed. Einstein: A Centenary Volume. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979.
Galison, Peter L., Gerald Holton, and Silvan S. Schweber.
Einstein for the Twenty-first Century. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2008.
Grüning, Michael. Ein Haus für Albert Einstein. Berlin: Verlag
der Nation, 1990.
Hadamard, Jacques. An Essay on the Psychology of Invention
in the Mathematical Field. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1945.
Highfi eld, Roger, and Paul Carter. The Private Lives of Albert
Einstein. London: Faber and Faber, 1993.
Hoffmann, Banesh. Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel. New
York: Viking, 1972.
———. “Einstein and Zionism.” In General Relativity and
Gravitation, ed. G. Shaviv and J. Rosen. New York:
Wiley, 1975.
Holton, Gerald. The Advancement of Science and Its Burdens.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Holton, Gerald, and Yehuda Elkana, eds. Albert Einstein:
Historical and Cultural Perspectives. The Centennial
Symposium in Jerusalem. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1982.
Hu, Danian. China and Albert Einstein. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2005.
Illy, József. Albert Meets America: How Journalists Treated
Genius during Einstein’s 1921 Travels. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2006.
Infeld, Leopold. The Quest: The Evolution of a Scientist. New
York: Doubleday, 1941.
———. Albert Einstein. Rev. ed. New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons, 1950.
Isaacson, Walter. Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2007.
 
Bibliography 553
Jammer, Max. Einstein and Religion. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1999.
Janssen, Michel, Robert Schulmann, et al., eds. The Collected
Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 7, The Berlin Years:
Writings, 1918–1921. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2002. (Trans. Alfred Engel, 2002.)
Jerome, Fred. The Einstein File: J. Edgar Hoover’s Secret War
against the World’s Most Famous Scientist. New York:
St. Martin’s, 2002.
———. Einstein on Israel and Zionism. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 2009.
Jerome, Fred, and Rodger Taylor. Einstein on Race and Racism.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press,
2005.
Kaller’s autographs catalog. “Jewish Visionaries,” 1997.
Kaller’s Antiques and Autographs, at Macy’s,
37th St., New York City.
Kantha, Sachi Sri. An Einstein Dictionary. Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1996.
———. “Medical Profile of Einstein: Six Analytical Papers.”
Available through author, Gifu University,
Japan.
Klein, Martin, A. J. Kox, and Robert Schulmann, eds. The
Collected Papers of AlbertEinstein, Vol. 5, The Swiss
Years: Correspondence, 1902–1914. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1993. (Trans. Anna Beck,
1995.)
Kox, A. J., Martin J. Klein, and Robert Schulmann, eds. The
Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 6, The Berlin
Years: Writings, 1914–1917. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1996. (Trans. Alfred Engel, 1996.)
Leach, Henry G., ed. Living Philosophies: A Series of Intimate
Credos. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1931.
Levenson, Thomas. Einstein in Berlin. New York: Bantam,
2003.
Marianoff, Dmitri, with Palma Wayne. Einstein: An Intimate
Study of a Great Man. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
Doran, 1944.
 
554 Bibliography
Michelmore, P. Einstein: Profile of the Man. New York:
Dodd, 1962.
Moszkowski, Alexander. Conversations with Einstein. Trans.
Henry L. Brose. New York: Horizon Press, 1970.
(Conversations took place in 1920, trans. 1921, published
in English in 1970.)
Nathan, Otto, and Heinz Norden, eds. Einstein on Peace.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1960.
Neffe, Jürgen. Einstein. Trans. Shelley Frisch. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005.
Ohanian, Hans C. Einstein’s Mistakes: The Human Failings
of Genius. New York: Norton, 2008.
Pais, Abraham. Subtle Is the Lord: The Science and the Life of
Albert Einstein. Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press, 1982.
———. Einstein Lived Here. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994.
———. A Tale of Two Continents. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1997.
Planck, Max. Where Is Science Going? New York: Norton,
1932.
Popovi´c, Milan, ed. In Albert’s Shadow: The Life and Letters
of Mileva Mari´c, Einstein’s First Wife. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2003.
Regis, Ed. Who Got Einstein’s Offi ce? Reading, Mass.:
 Addison-Wesley, 1987.
Reiser, Anton. Albert Einstein: A Biographical Portrait. New
York: Boni, 1930.
Richards, Alan Windsor. Einstein as I Knew Him. Princeton,
N.J.: Harvest Press, 1979.
Robinson, Andrew. Einstein: A Hundred Years of Relativity.
Bath, U.K.: Palazzo, 2005.
Roboz Einstein, Elizabeth. Hans Albert Einstein: Reminiscences
of His Life and Our Life Together. Iowa City: Iowa
Institute of Hydraulic Research, University of Iowa,
1991.
Rosenkranz, Ze’ev. The Einstein Scrapbook. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.
 
Bibliography 555
Rosenkranz, Ze’ev, and Barbara Wolff, eds. Einstein: The
Persistent Illusion of Transience. Jerusalem: Magnes
Press of Hebrew University, 2007.
Rosenthal-Schneider, Ilse. Reality and Scientific Truth. Detroit,
Mich.: Wayne State University Press, 1980.
Rowe, David E., and Robert Schulmann. Einstein on Politics:
His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism,
Zionism, War, Peace, and the Bomb. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2007.
Ryan, Dennis P., ed. Einstein and the Humanities. New York:
Greenwood Press, 1987.
Sayen, Jamie. Einstein in America. New York: Crown, 1985.
Schilpp, Paul, ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist.
Evanston, Ill.: Library of Living Philosophers, 1949.
Schulmann, Robert. “Einstein Rediscovers Judaism.” Unpublished
manuscript, 1999.
Schulmann, Robert, A. J. Kox., Michel Janssen, and József
Illy, eds. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol. 8,
Parts A and B, The Berlin Years: Correspondence, 1914–
1918. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998.
(Trans. Ann Hentschel, 1998.)
Schweber, Silvan S. Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning
of Genius. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2008.
Seelig, Carl. Albert Einstein und die Schweiz. Zurich: EuropaVerlag,
1952.
Seelig, Carl, ed. Helle Zeit, dunkle Zeit: In Memorium Albert
Einstein. Zurich: Europa Verlag, 1956.
Sotheby’s auction catalog, June 26, 1998.
Stachel, John. “Einstein’s Jewish Identity.” Unpublished
manuscript, 1989.
Stachel, John, ed., with the assistance of Trevor Lipscombe,
Alice Calaprice, and Sam Elworthy. Einstein’s
Miraculous Year: Five Papers That Changed the Face of
Physics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1998.
Stachel, John, et al., eds. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein,
Vol. 1, The Early Years: 1879–1902. Princeton, N.J.:
 
556 Bibliography
Princeton University Press, 1987. (Trans. Anna Beck,
1987.)
Stachel, John, et al., eds. The Collected Papers of Albert
 Einstein, Vol. 2, The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900–1909.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
(Trans. Anna Beck, 1989.)
Stern, Fritz. Einstein’s German World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1999.
Viereck, George S. Glimpses of the Great. New York: Macauley,
1930.
Whitrow, G. J. Einstein: The Man and His Achievement. New
York: Dover, 1967.
 
Index of Key Words
Abandon competition, 273
Act intelligently in human affairs,
184
Advancement of science, 357
A.E.C., 283
Agnostic, 340
Aim of science, 388
A is success in life, 230
Alienation, 8, 382, 387
Altar of stupidity, 9
American men, as toy dogs
for women, 63
Animals without wings, 217
Arrows of hate, 16
Artist’s model, 12
As long as there is man, 278
Atheists, fanatical, 337
Aversion to Jews, 195
Beam, 351–352
Bear, like a, 16
Beasts, be like the, 180
Beetle, when a blind, 11
Bête noire, 6
Bibo the parrot, 414
Big brains, 422
Blind obedience to authority,
161
Board of wood, 402
Bones, worship at my, 96
Branches of the same tree, 178
Brief is this existence, 93
Brush your teeth, 84
Bullets kill men, bombs kill
cities, 274
Casual remark, 21
Cemetery of disappointed
hopes, 389
Chaotic diversity, 390
Chosen one of the chosen people
(Weizmann), 156
Christian church honors a
Jewish scientist, 220
Clock, 355, 373
Combine wisdom and power,
189
Compulsory military service,
252, 268, 269
Concern for man, 383
Confusion of goals, 181
Conscience and common
sense, 266
Conscience supersedes
authority of state, 283,
424
Contempt: for authority, 12;
for justice, 270; for victim,
315
Cosmos, 173, 336, 363
Creative achievements, 339
Creature who is my equal, 34
Crime of the Germans, 169
Curious, I am passionately, 20
Deepest sorrow, 49
Defense is in law and order,
274
Delicate little plant, 107, 425
Demigods on stilts (Princeton),
72
 
558 Index of Key Words
Democratic institutions, 279,
299, 301
Details, the rest are, 324
Deteriorate into tyranny, 300
Determinism, keep alive, 289
Determinist, 205
Developed so slowly, 25
Dice, God does not play, 380,
393
Diffi culties in mathematics, 80
Distinction between past,
present, and future, 113
Distorting mirror of the press,
382
Doing “good,” 176
Do not mind . . . girl, 81
Don Quixote ideal, 331–332
Don’t read any newspapers,
239
Drawers, compartmentalized
into, 9
Dull-witted kinsmen, 201
Economic: fear, 297; security,
302, 306
Empty stomach of Germany,
164
Enemies of peace, 420
English as their language (Israelis),
223
Equally wise and foolish, 177
Ethical: basis, 13; behavior,
328; convictions, 182; culture,
445; good, 336; standards,
397; things, 296;
traditions, 206; values, 26
Evil: forces of, 71; monster in
Germany, 166
Examinations, opposed to, 108
Fair sex, 64
Faithfulness, forced, 186
Fame, 7, 10, 73
Fate, 7, 12, 14, 51, 56, 72, 183,
206, 313, 325, 383; of nations,
269
Fear of communism, 304
Fed up with relativity, 371
Fellow creatures, 333
Final deliverance, 93
Fire-spewing Vesuvius, 305
Flock of sheep, 188
Flowerlike being, 438
Forest made up only of vines,
434
Freedom only possible by
struggling, 298
Free will, 4, 205
Friction between groups, 179
Future: past, present, and, 113;
think about, 3, 18
Give the boy his Ph.D., 378
God: expression of human
weaknesses, 342; personal,
342; pray to, as
long as you, 343; who rewards
and punishes, 330
Good: cause, 183; fortunes, 79;
government, gives liberty,
306
Goose cracklings, 43
Gravitation, and love, 440
Had I known that the Germans,
275
Harmonious: atmosphere, 73;
life, 129, 406, 443; person,
358; personality, 105; relationship,
440; spirit, 79
Have never done research . . .
atomic bomb, 281
Health, human, 477
Heart says yes, 202
 
Index of Key Words 559
Herd of buffalos, 185
Historians, as hotheads, 361
Holy curiosity of inquiry, 107
Hopeless confusion of opinions,
293
Horse for single harness, 13
House, not used as a place of
pilgrimage, 95
Human: affair(s), 137, 138,
184, 194, 299, 444, 447;
being, is part of the
whole, 339; delusions, 55;
emotions and feelings,
391–392; endeavor(s), 329,
384, 435, 445; life, 333,
384; mind, 204, 336, 341,
389, 400; nature, 334, 443;
race, 19, 68, 69, 175, 254,
278, 328, 421; relationships,
5; society, 106, 433;
traditions and ideals, 404
Humanity, 121, 134, 205, 206,
210, 249, 285, 290, 300,
327, 428, 444, 445, 455
Humiliation by teachers, 104
Humility, 124, 125, 435, 446
Idealist, 146
Ideals, 13, 102, 104, 203, 210,
224, 248, 292, 404
Ideal working . . . conditions,
417
Illusion(s), 113, 122, 182, 185,
264, 295, 402
Imagination . . . knowledge, 12
Imitate the stupid nationalism
. . . of the goyim, 217
Incomprehensible universe,
325
Insanity of nationalism, 284
Instinct and inclination, European
by, 15
Instinctive feeling, pacifi sm
as, 247
Intellectual activity, 99
Keep your mouth shut, 237
Kinsmen, 194, 197, 201
Knowledge and justice, 68
Lame, science without religion
is, 335
Laws . . . freedom of expression,
297
Lazy habits of thinking, 175
Liberation, 124, 153, 177, 292,
338
Life, is the supreme value, 231
Lighthouses, 102
Lonely, widely known [but],
20
Lord [God], 372, 374. See also
God
Love: brings happiness, 439;
of living creatures, 413;
for the spiritual and
moral, 210
Magnet for all the crackpots,
21
Man changes but little, 179
Marching in line and fi le, 249
Mathematics enjoys special
esteem, 372
Matters concerning truth and
justice, 187
Meaning, in life, 79, 185
Meaningless, life, 333
Measles of mankind, 293
Mediocre minds, 149
Men are deplorable, 456
Minds and hearts of men, 274
Misfortune suits mankind, 174
Mission of the state, 251
 
560 Index of Key Words
Mistake in my life, 284
Moral: conscience, 218; disarmament,
266; philosophy,
326; responsibility, 222;
strength, 69
Mother Nature, “yes, maybe,
no,” 376
Music of the spheres, 204
Mutability of human relationships,
5
Mysterious, 12, 120, 326, 331,
373
Mystery, 56, 330, 331, 423, 425
Mystical trend, 446
National loyalty, 295
Nations ignore history, 175
Never have lifted a fi nger, 170
Never in favor of a [Jewish]
state, 216
Newspaper clamor, 9
New type of thinking, 273
Noble gas, Jews resemble an
uncondensable, 209
Nobody understands me, 17
No special talents, 20
Not a comedy, 267
Not idolized, 433
Not yet hanged (caption by
Hitler regime), 509
Objective matters, 20
Old fogey, 56
Old geezer, 58
Old who have died, 91
Opinions that differ, 189
Oriental by blood, 9
Ostrich who buries his head
in the sand, 3
Outer and inner life, 14
Outward and inner freedom,
181
Papagoyim, 344
Paradise: Pasadena, 66; Princeton,
73
Parlor game, war is not, 266
Past thinking, 273, 476
Pays most for things, 230
Peaceful resistance, 260
Pearls of Persian wisdom, 8
Peddler, 24
People are like bicycles, 176
Perfection of means, 181
Perils and upheavals, 425
Philistinism, 332
Pigsty, 13
Pipe, as yet unsmoked (Princeton),
71
Piper, 326
Plumber, 24
Political: ideal, 293; institutions,
69; passions, 307;
unity, 102, 208
Politician, I am not, 292
Politics: is more diffi cult, 188;
is a pendulum, 181
Positivist, I am not, 395
Power and wealth, 68
Pray to God, 343
President, if I were to be, 225
Primitive and beastlike, 188
Prize ox, 63
Profounder scientifi c minds,
333
Psychopaths (Germans), 168
Puritan’s restraint, 405
Pursuit of knowledge, 209
Questionable undertakings,
443
Questioning, true art of, 99
Race is a fraud, 311
Ray of light, 351. See also Beam
 
Index of Key Words 561
Reading diverts the mind, 175
Realm of art and science, 415
Reasonable agreement with
the Arabs, 212
Refi nement of everyday thinking,
388
Refusal to testify, 304
Relationship to the Jewish
people, 222
Religion as childish superstition,
223
Religious denomination,
membership in, 201
Remember your humanity,
285
Remind the western world,
210
Reminiscence is colored, 231
Responsibility (for weapons),
280
Rewarding and punishing.
See God
Rich kinsmen of Dollar-land,
197
Riddle, eternal, 338
Road to human greatness is
through suffering, 315
Rocks, war fought with, 280
Run-down old car, 59
Satisfaction of physical needs,
180
Science: is in its infancy, 406;
without religion is lame,
335
Scientifi c study of the higher
kinds, 327
Seasick, people make me, 176
Second thoughts . . . maybe
God is malicious, 374
Secrets of nature, 19, 324
Seek in the stars, 11
Shipwrecked, 182, 188
Shortness of man’s memory,
307
Simple: events . . . complex
order, 363; theories, 385,
397; and unassuming
life, 13
Simplicity and economy in assumptions,
403
Sitting with a pretty girl, 409
Smoking, 441, 447
Snail that abandons its shell,
214
Social classes, 421
Socks, 422, 500, 512, 527
Sold myself to science, 395
Solitary being, social being,
185
Sorry species one belongs to,
173
Speak fairly late, began to, 22
Spirit, superior, 325
Spiritual: evolution, 336; values,
443
Stabbed me like a dagger, 46
State: exists for man, 251; no
place in emotional life,
289
Still among the living, 81
Stockpile, the bomb, 277, 278
Stranger everywhere, 8
Striving for truth, 100, 181
Stubbornness of a mule, 25
Stupid, become more, 7
Subtle, but malicious he is not,
the Lord God is, 374
Successful man, 178
Superior intelligence, 324
Supreme: art of the teacher,
100; goal of all theory, 384
Survived Nazism and two
wives, 20
 
562 Index of Key Words
Teacher: is a valuable messenger,
109; noble, 101
Terms of peace . . . cause of future
wars, 263
Theorist: goes astray, 360; is a
tamed metaphysicist, 402
Theory of eternity, 449
Third World War, Fourth
World War, 280
Tom Thumb, 167
Toy dogs for their wives,
American men are, 63
Tree of Knowledge, 6
Trumpet solo, 9
Truth and beauty, 100
Two percent, 248
Tyranny of a world government,
272
Tyrants succeeded by scoundrels,
294
Unbelief, in God, 340
Universal: humanity, 205; in
thought, 15
Untrue to his own case, 183
Value charity and love of fellow
being, 173
Vanity, 4, 122, 330
Violence, has never proved
creative, 295
War: is won, 273; with wife,
65
Weakness of democracies,
297
Withstand the tears, have
learned to, 40
Wretched traditions, of Germans,
178
 
Subject Index
Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations.
Aaltonen, V. T., 341
Abortion, 413
Absolute space, 141
Academic freedom, 105, 108,
198
Academic life, 423
Achievement, 413, 433
Adler, Charles, 217
Agnosticism, 340
Albaugh, D., 341
Ambition, 413
America and Americans,
63–72, 255, 278, 307, 312,
442; and anticommunism,
303–306, 518; national
leaders, 119–120, 147–148,
157–158, 504; and Prohibition,
448; and racism,
314; and Zionism, 196–
197, 199
Ancient Greece, 179, 210, 405
Anderman, Eugenie, 186
Anderson, Marian, 312
Animals, 413–415
Anschütz-Kaempfe, Hermann,
436
Anticommunism, 303–306,
524, 526–527
Anti-intellectualism, 306
Anti-relativism, 515
Anti-Semitism, 8, 193, 195–
196, 199–200, 202, 205, 515
Anti-Zionism, 217
Appel, Lottie, 545
Arab-Israeli confl ict, 188
Arab peoples, 193, 204, 206–
207, 209, 212, 216–219,
221, 224
Aram, A., 259
Arco, Georg, Count von, 322
Arnold, Felix, 306
Aryans, 167
Astrology, 416, 479–480
Atheism, 326, 336–337,
340–341
Atomic bomb, 17, 148, 255,
258, 261–285, 520
Atomic energy, 270–273, 275,
278, 390
Atomic fi ssion, 284–285, 387,
390
Authority, 104, 338
Autobiographies, 181
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 235,
237, 239
Bacharach, A., 122
Baeck, Leo, 188
Baha’i religion, 248
Baierlein, Ralph, 427
Barbusse, Henri, 294, 331
Bargmann, Valentine, 374, 524,
547
Beauty, 100
Bedi, R., 406
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 235,
239
Belkin, Samuel, 489
 
564 Subject Index
Benenson, Raymond, 397
Ben Gurion, David, 489
Bergmann, Hugo, 195, 204
Bergmann, Peter, 374, 547
Berkowitz, M., 340
Berks, Robert, 22
Bernstein, Rabbi Philip, 252
Berryman, C., 287, 471
Besso, Michele, 113, 354, 489–
490; letters to, 17, 39–41,
44, 48, 50, 63, 151, 161, 204,
299, 302, 381, 438, 441, 456
Besso family, 113
Bible, 325, 329, 337–338, 342
Biographies, 181
Birobidjan, Russia, 216
Birth control, 416
Birthdays, 417
Black, Algernon, 180, 334, 392,
490
Blinoff, Sybille, 23
Bloch, Ernst, 239
Blumenfeld, Kurt, 225, 490
Bohm, David, 342
Bohr, Niels, 113–114, 380, 393,
490–491, 522
Bok, Derek, 478
Bolshevism, 291
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 357
Bomb. See Atomic bomb; Hiroshima,
bombing of; Hydrogen
bomb; Nuclear
deterrence; Nuclear
weapons
Books, 417–418
Born, Hedwig (Hedi), 9, 11,
19, 52, 91, 95, 144, 229,
290, 418, 491
Born, Max, 115, 409, 491–492;
letters to, 6, 8–9, 11, 16, 19,
21, 24, 56, 135, 144–145,
166, 174, 182, 289, 311,
365, 380, 394, 428, 432
Borough Hall, Princeton, New
Jersey, 22
Boston, Massachusetts, 63
Boyd, Julian, 456
Brahms, Johannes, 235–236
Brandeis, Louis, 115
Brandeis University, 198,
218
Broch, Hermann, 395
Brod, Max, 19, 492
Broglie, Prince Louis de, 378,
381, 499
Brown, Rita Mae, 474
Brush, Stephen, 526
Buber, Martin, 224
Bucky, Frieda, 148
Bucky, Gustav, 111
Bucky, Thomas, 492
Buddha, 445
Buddhism, 329, 482
Bulgakov, Valentine, 176, 414,
426
Bureaucracy, 482
Busch, Wilhelm, 463
Business, 17
California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), 383
Capitalism, 107, 297, 299–300
Carlebach, Azriel, 223
Casals, Pablo, 115–116
Casper, Leopold, 125
Catholicism, 416
Causality, 418–419
Chadwick, James, 285
Chambers, Whittaker, 493
Chaplin, Charlie, 116, 493
Chapple, A., 342
Chavan, Louis, 494
 
Subject Index 565
Cheyney State Teachers College
(Pennsylvania), 280,
301, 316, 401
Chicago Decalogue Society of
Lawyers, 283, 304, 424
Children, 77–83, 91, 100, 183
China and Chinese, 419–420
Chinese Physical Society, 494
Chopra, Deepak, 477
Chou, Peiyuan, 494
Christmas, 420
City University of New York,
99, 149
Civilization, 294, 444; and nuclear
war, 272, 274, 285
Civil liberties, 289
Civil rights, 65, 69
Civil rights movement, 312
Clarity, 420
Class, 421
Clewell, David, 494–498
Clothes, 421–422
Clynes, Manfred, 26
Cohen, Arthur, 77
Cohen, I. Bernard, 498
Colonialism, 307
Commins, Saxe, 440
Common sense, 481
Communism, 277, 303–305
Competition, 273, 281–282,
422–423
Comprehensibility, 423
Compromise, 423
Compton, Arthur, 498
Conformity, 201
Conscience, 248, 342, 423–424,
493
Conscientious objector, 257,
268
Constitution, U.S., 304
Cooperation, 273
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 507
Cosmic religion, 151, 321, 329–
330, 482, 532–533
Cosmopolitanism, 200, 264
Cranston, John, 404
Crazy people, 21, 463–464
Creative artist, 239
Creativity, 100, 424
Crises, 425
Croce, Benedetto, 338
Curie, Marie, 116–118, 134,
498–499
Curiosity, 107, 138, 381, 425
Cynicism, 505
Dällenbach, Walter, 361, 365
Darwin, Charles, 170
Davidson, Randall Thomas,
archbishop of Canterbury,
376
Death, 91–96, 483
Death penalty, 426
Debye, Peter J. W., 380
Deductive method, 397
Degenhart, Joseph, 499
Democracy, 69, 293, 297, 299,
301, 306
Deprivation, 174
Determinism, 12, 205, 289,
326, 332, 492
Dialectical materialism, 467
Dicke, Robert, 524
Dictatorship, 382
Dingle, Herbert, 356
Disarmament, 243–260
Dispentiere, J., 456
Doctors, 427
Dodds, Harold, 499
Doing good, 176
Donahue, Gerald, 177, 212
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 418
 
566 Subject Index
Dreams, 449
Drinking, 448
Dukas, Helen, ix–xi, xii, xiii–
xiv, 14, 23, 27, 95, 409, 500;
“Zettelkästchen,” xiii
Dürrenmatt, Friedrich, 500
Dyson, Frank, 369, 500
E  mc2, 350–351, 408, 507–
508, 513, 531
Eastern Europe, 304
Eban, Abba, 20, 222, 489, 500
Economic life, 174, 269, 293,
297, 307
Economics, 478–479, 481
Eddington, Arthur, 365, 367,
369, 487, 542
Edison,Thomas, 100
Education, 97–109, 119, 161,
198, 428–429, 451, 473
Ehrat, Jakob, 20
Ehrenfest, Paul, 4, 6, 9, 43, 68,
114, 118–119, 173, 194,
199, 204, 209, 370, 379–
380, 418, 423, 487, 501
Ehrenfest, Vassik, 119
Einstein, Albert: and agnosticism,
340; annus mirabilis,
354–355; appreciations of,
by others, 489–492, 494,
498–499, 504, 506, 519–
523, 526, 528–534, 536,
538; and atheism, 326,
336–337, 340–341; and
atomic bomb, 270–271,
273, 275, 281, 284; attractive
to women, 64, 133,
501, 525, 537; birth, 15,
22; career plans, 4–5, 24,
474–475; as celebrity, 7, 9,
14–15, 20–23, 25–26, 73,
116, 193, 463–464, 492;
childhood, 18, 22; citizenship,
61, 68, 164–165, 168,
195; and cosmic religion,
321, 329–330; death, 27,
40, 81, 91–96, 489–492, 494,
503–504, 517, 531–532,
538; detachment from ordinary
life, 3–5, 13–14, 16,
20, 512; diet, 453–454; divorce,
35–42, 46, 87; education,
6, 8, 15–16, 24–25,
499, 518; as European, 15;
family, 8; as father, 37–38,
40, 45–51, 84–87; fi nancial
affairs, 166; as German, 6,
516–517; hobbies, 450,
503, 514, 533, 536–537; internationalism,
5–6, 9–10,
197, 289; and Israel, 20,
193, 222–223, 225, 489; as
Jew, 5–6, 10–11, 193, 195–
196, 199–201, 204, 209,
222, 293, 468, 489, 500,
516; last will, x, 50; letter
to FDR, 258, 270, 275, 284,
504; life in Berlin, 43, 161,
163; love of art, 10; love of
music, 237, 240–241, 466–
467, 502, 506, 530, 543;
love of nature, 502; marriage
to Elsa Löwenthal,
16, 42–44, 511; marriage
to Mileva Maric´, xi–xiii, 4,
31–41, 518; memory, 21;
Nobel Prize, 379, 520; old
age, 17, 55–59; and paci-
fi sm, 163, 245, 247, 249,
252, 258–260; personal appearance,
26, 77, 421–422,
493–494, 512, 519, 533–
534, 536–537; personality,
512–515, 521, 525, 535;
 
Subject Index 567
photos, ii, xvi, xxiv, 1, 29,
61, 75, 171, 191, 227, 233,
261, 309, 319, 347, 411,
461, 487, 527, 547; and
politics, 6, 289, 292, 299,
303, 305–306, 308 (see also
World government); portrayed
in art, 1, 12–13, 22,
73, 132, 450; religious beliefs,
324–325, 331, 338,
341–343, 446, 500 (see also
Cosmic religion); resignation
from Prussian Academy
of Sciences, 165, 525;
sayings attributed to,
471–485; as scientist, 7,
10–11, 19–20, 25, 73, 379,
387–389, 395, 401, 510;
sense of humor, 56, 490,
498, 505, 523; simplicity,
13, 19, 504, 507, 509–510,
528–529, 534; and solitude,
55, 57, 73, 133, 424,
441, 465, 468–469; as
teacher, 542–543; as teetotaler,
448, 454; thought
processes, 4, 18, 26, 451;
verses, 461–469; visit to
Japan, xv, 78, 411, 437–
438; work habits, 503;
and Zionism, 225, 490,
534–535
Einstein, Bernhard (grandson),
49, 235
Einstein, Eduard (son), 6, 11,
41, 45, 49–50, 87, 176, 204,
229, 458
Einstein, Elsa (Löwenthal)
(second wife), 16, 44, 411,
511; letters to, 35–36, 38,
42–43, 91, 118, 126, 359,
371, 421, 441, 501
Einstein, Evelyn (granddaughter),
xi
Einstein, Frieda (Knecht)
(daughter-in-law), xi,
49–51
Einstein, Hans Albert (son), xi,
29, 31, 45–49, 87, 502; letters
to, 6, 11, 50–51, 84–86,
93, 204, 235, 271, 457
Einstein, Ilse (stepdaughter),
40, 42, 44–45, 48
Einstein, Klaus (grandson), 50
Einstein, Lieserl (daughter),
31, 45–46
Einstein, Maja (sister), 23, 51–
52, 92, 144, 503
Einstein, Margot (stepdaughter),
27, 44–45, 48, 51, 59,
132, 171, 225, 240, 450, 503
Einstein, Paul (great-grandson),
235
Einstein, Pauline (mother), 32,
36, 51–52, 365
Einstein, Thomas (greatgrandson),
xii
Einstein Family Correspondence
Trust, xii
Einstein-Maric´, Mileva (fi rst
wife), xi–xiii, 4, 29, 31–41,
45–49, 52, 168, 417, 441,
517–518
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 119–
120, 153, 504
Elisabeth, Queen of Belgium,
22, 55, 58, 67, 71–72, 240,
307, 406, 435, 450
Emmons, Dick, 79
Empiricism, 340
Engels, Friedrich, 136–137
England and the English, 217,
219, 221, 255, 321, 427–
428, 515
 
568 Subject Index
English language, 223, 428
Enriques, Adriana, 100
Epistemology, 428–429
Epstein, Monique, 82
Epstein, Paul, 194
Equations, 308, 352, 355, 362,
372, 384, 396, 399, 405–
406, 507–508. See also
E  mc2
Esperanto, 476
Ethical culture, 445
Ethics. See Morality
European union, 280
Everett, Hugh, III, 81
Experimental science, 100,
136, 139–140, 376, 476
Extraterrestrial life, 79,
429–430
Failure, 174
Falsehood, 453
Fankhauser, Gerhard, 94
Fantova, Johanna, 231, 423,
434, 468–469
Faraday, Michael, 120, 170,
398
Fascism, 155, 167
Fear, 104, 187, 208
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 504
Fermi, Enrico, 270
Finch, Henry LeRoy, 504
Fischer, Hedwig, 151
Flaubert, Gustave, 478
Flesch, S., 343
Flexner, Abraham, 120
Flying saucers, 429–430
Foerster, Wilhelm, 263
Fokker, Adriaan, 163, 229
Fowlkes, R., 270
Fox, H. Herbert, 260
France, Anatole, 101
Franck, James, 25
Frank, Judge Jerome, 215
Frank, Philipp, 17, 87, 239,
505
Frauenglass, William, 303
Freedom, 298. See also Academic
freedom
Freedom of expression, 297
Freedom of opinion, 105
Free speech, 165, 382
Free will, 4, 12, 205
Freud, Sigmund, 121–122, 177,
263, 268, 388, 505–506
Freuder, Irene, 15
Freund, H., 449
Friedmann, H., 325
Friedrich, Walter, 506
Frohlich, Beatrice, 341
Future, 3, 18
Future thinking, 273, 476
Galilei, Galileo, 122–123, 141,
373, 398, 507
Gambling, 478
Games, 431
Gamow, George, 506
Gandhi, Mahatma, 123–125,
140, 150, 257, 260, 303,
455
Gardner, L., 430
General theory of relativity,
85, 146, 357, 359–360, 366,
369–370, 372, 400–402,
408, 491–492, 517, 519–
520, 536, 543–544; objections
to, 136; proof of, 7,
193, 362, 365, 368–369,
500, 515–516, 543; reception
of, 361; use of term,
349
Geneva Disarmament Conference
(1932), 267
 
Subject Index 569
Genius, 114, 141, 144, 478, 493,
501, 507, 528, 533–535
Geography, 474–475
Geometry, 372, 377
Germany and Germans, 159–
170, 224, 245, 276, 290, 307,
509; and anti-Semitism,
199, 205, 210–212, 217–
218, 294–295; and atomic
bomb, 258, 275, 277, 284;
and relativity theory,
427–428, 516. See also
Nazism
God, 319–345, 399, 444, 500;
and design of world, 344,
407; does not play dice,
56, 380, 393, 408; is not
malicious, 374–375; Jewish,
208; personal, 321,
325, 328, 330, 333, 335–
337, 340–343; will not be
dictated to, 372
Goehner, Sister Margrit, 343
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von,
125, 175, 238
Goethe Prize, 224
Goldschmidt, Rudolf, 464
Goldstein, Israel, 506
Goldstein, Rabbi Herbert S.,
325
Good acts, 431
Gordon, Ernest, 507
Government, 287–308. See also
World government
Graphology, 431
Gravitation, 353, 359, 377, 399,
529. See also General theory
of relativity
Greenway, Rev. C., 445
Grimm Brothers, 170
Grossmann, Marcel, 359, 370
Gutkind, Eric, 223, 342
Haber, Fritz, 44, 126, 197, 245,
427
Habicht, Conrad, 355
Hadamard, Jacques, 265, 281,
451
Haeckel, Ernst, 322
Haenisch, Konrad, 163, 366
Hahn, Otto, 169, 284
Haldane, Lord Richard B. S.,
126, 427, 507
Halpern-Neuda, Lili, 323, 446
Halsmann (Halsman),
Philippe, 12–13, 278, 422
Handel, George Frederick, 235
Harding, Walter, 125
Harvard, 63
Hate, 183
Hawking, Stephen, xv, 507–508
Hawkwind (rock group), 509
Hebrew language, 223, 325
Hebrew University, Jerusalem,
x, xi, xii, 194–195, 197–
199, 201–202, 219, 221,
522, 538
Heisenberg, Werner, 127, 378
Held, Mr. and Mrs., 182
Heller, Robert, 162
Hellman, Alfred, 215
Hellpach, Willy, 205
Henderson, Archibald, 379
Herbert Spencer Lecture, 385
Herblock, 89
Heuss, Theodor, 170
Hewes, Lydia B., 303
Hilb, Emil, 467
Hilbert, David, 143, 170, 361
Hiroshima, bombing of, 148
History, 103–104, 175, 179, 187
Hitler, Adolf, 17, 70, 127–128,
164, 166, 168–169, 184,
245, 294–295, 304, 431,
509
 
570 Subject Index
Hoffmann, Banesh, xiii, 407,
451, 509–510
Holland, David, 400
Holzapfel, E., 404
Home, 432
Homosexuality, 432
Hook, Sidney, 303
Hopf, Ludwig, 8
Hopi Indians, 510
House Un-American Activities
Committee (HUAC),
303, 305, 518
Human being, 339–340
Human brain, 474
Human feeling, 329, 391–392
Humankind, 4, 83, 171–189,
205, 290
Human life, 227–232, 333,
384
Human relationships, 5, 52
Human rights, 187, 283, 289,
305
Human society, 103, 106, 185
Human will, 124–125
Hume, David, 429
Humor, 231
Hupfeld, Herman, 510–511
Hurwitz, Ida, 91
Hurwitz family, 161, 421
Hutchins, Robert, 272
Hutchinson, Paul, 247
Huth, Hermann, 453
Hydrogen bomb, 281, 283
Idealism, 146
Ideals, 13
Ideas, 337
Imagination, 12, 26, 100, 481,
511
Immigrants, 432–433
Income tax, 479
India, 123–125, 140, 311
Individual, 65, 68, 70, 93–95,
105, 107, 175, 182, 188,
248, 276, 295–296, 433–434
Individual freedom, 65, 178,
181–182, 298
Individualism, 67, 433–434,
482
Inductive method, 322,
367–368
Infeld, Leopold, 451, 511
Injustice, 178
Insanity, 474
Institute for Advanced Study,
Princeton, x, 19, 73, 120,
144, 157, 394
Intellectual property, 21
Intellectuals, 263; German,
169
Intelligence, 434–435, 478, 483
Intelligent design, 344
Internationalism, 175, 177,
194, 246, 264, 290–291
International language, 476
International law, 473
Intuition, 129, 180, 363, 368,
435
Invention, 436
Irigaray, Luce, 513
Isaac, Jules, 284
Isolation, 102
Israel (Palestine), 20, 156, 191–
225, 489, 535
Italy and Italians, 436
James, Milton, 280, 301, 316,
401
Japan and Japanese, xv, 78,
236, 276, 279, 437–439
Jerusalem, 202
Jesus Christ, 322, 326, 337, 445,
455
“Jewish physics,” 516–517
 
Subject Index 571
Jews and Judaism, 70, 127,
153, 156, 165, 167, 169–
170, 179, 188, 191–225,
468
Joffe, A. F., 514
Juliusburger, Otto, 56, 111,
169, 184, 389, 397
Jung, Carl, 121
Justice, 102, 135–136, 138, 165,
178, 187–188, 207, 209,
278, 296, 301
Kahler, Alice, 514
Kahler, Erich, 193, 514
Kamerlingh Onnes, Heike, 91,
128–129, 514
Kant, Immanuel, 129–130, 238,
335, 474
Kariel, Max, 454
Kennan, George, 130
Kepler, Johannes, 122, 130–
131, 416
Kerr, Alfred, 166, 324
Kessler, Count Harry, 324
Kingdon, Frank, 70, 309
Klein, Felix, 143
Klein, Martin, 501
Kleiner, Alfred, 358
Kneser, Adolf, 5
Knowledge, 100–101, 181, 188,
209, 336, 370, 403, 439,
452, 482
Kollin, Henry, 25
Konenkova, Margarita,
131–134
Kuwaki, Ayao, 437
Labor unions, 209
Ladenburg, Rudolf, 94
Lamont, C., 305
Lanczos, Cornel, 185, 393, 440
Landscape (pop group), 514
Langevin, Paul, 117, 134–135,
378, 515
Laub, Jakob, 358, 434
Laue, Max von, 135, 169, 515
Lawson, Robert, 515–516
Lazarev, P. P., 194
League of Nations, 118, 157–
158, 253, 444
Lebach, W., 57
Lebach family, 66, 116, 152
Lebau, G., 23
Lee, T., 232
Leistner, K. R., 137
Lenard, Philipp, 136, 516
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich,
136–137
Lentz, F., 20
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim,
238, 407
Lewinson, Thea, 431
Liberson, D., 413
Lilienthal, David, 218
Lindemann, Rudolf, 99
Lindheim, Irma, 209
Lipscombe, Mary, 545
Literature, 125, 151, 181
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon, 7, 9,
137–138, 174, 290, 292,
360–361, 365, 373, 487
Los Alamos Laboratory, 144
Love, 439–440, 465; of one’s
fellow being, 173; of subject
or hobby, 17
Löwenstein, Hubertus zu, 337
Löwenthal, Paula (sister-inlaw),
42
Lurie, Zvi, 224
Macauley, C. R., 243
Mach, Ernst, 138–139, 429
Machines, 391–392
Magalaner, Marvin, 339
 
572 Subject Index
Malkiel, Burton, 479
Manhattan Project, 144, 270
“Manifesto of 93,” 290
Mann, Thomas, 517
Manners, L., 187, 458
Marangoni, Ernesta, 20, 57,
436
Marcus, Robert, 340
Marianoff, Dmitri, 154, 517
Maric´, Mileva (fi rst wife). See
Einstein-Maric´, Mileva
Maric´, Zorka (sister-in-law),
31
Marriage, 440–442, 482
Marx, Julius, 164
Materialism, 212, 322, 443
Mathematicians, 143–144, 361
Mathematics, 16, 18, 142–144,
359, 371–372, 384–386,
397, 399, 401, 409
Maxwell, James Clerk, 352,
373, 398
Mayers, Alan E., 222
McCarthy, Sen. Joseph, 518
McCarthyism, 303–306, 518,
523–524
McGuire, Jeremiah, 453
Mechanics, 139, 141
Mediocrity, 149
Meitner, Lise, 139
Memory, 231
Mendelssohn, Felix, 235
Metaphysics, 402
Metropolitan Opera, New
York, 233
Meyer, Edgar, 321
Meyer-Schmid, Anna, 55
Michanowski, Ethel, 465
Michelson, Albert, 139–140,
347
Middle class, 505
Mikhailev, Pavel, 132
Military, the, 261, 261–285,
408
Military service, 247–249, 251–
252, 268–269
Miller, Dayton C., 374
Miller, William, 425, 451
Millikan, Robert, 347
Minkowski, Hermann, 518
Miracles, 443, 483
Modernity, 123, 397
Monism, 322
Montagu, Ashley, 263, 473
Moore, John, 260
Moos, P., 56
Morality, 208–210, 213, 224,
341–343, 443–445
Moral philosophy, 326–327
Morley, Edward, 139
Morrisett, A., 258
Moses, 445, 455
Moses, Edward, 414
Mount Wilson Observatory,
California, 502
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus,
151, 239–240, 483
Muehsam, Hans, 12, 70, 111,
183–184, 217–219, 231,
404, 417, 454
Muehsam, Minna, 219
Murobuse, Koshin, 437
Murphy, James, 382
Murray, Stanley, 24
Music, 85, 155, 230, 233–241,
311, 466–467
Music education, 239
Mussorgsky, Modeste, 240
Muste, A. J., 281
Mysticism, 446
Nathan, Otto, ix–xi, xii, 168,
302–303, 442
Nathan, Paul, 8
 
Subject Index 573
Nationalism, 199–201, 203,
205–206, 212, 215, 217–
218, 225, 268, 284, 293–
294, 296. See also Zionism
Nationality, 175
Nature, 92, 120, 184, 364, 376,
385, 396, 398, 446; study
of, 3, 16, 18, 95, 322, 324
Nature, laws of, 333, 341, 377–
378, 388
Nazism, 20, 123, 127–128, 145–
146, 156, 169, 214, 322, 476
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 140, 519
Nellhaus, Gerhard, 257
Nernst, Walther, 170, 515, 519
Netherlands, 68
Neumann, Betty, 11–12
Newton, Isaac, 130, 140–142,
373, 375, 380, 397–398,
475, 507, 526, 529, 532
Ney, Elisabeth, 77
Nickerson, A., 341
Nicolai, Georg, 263
Niggli, Julia, 3
Nobel, Alfred, 143
Nobel Prize Committee, 520
Noether, Emmy, 143–144
Nonviolence, 123–124, 303
Novalis (Georg Philipp Friedrich
Freiherr von Hardenberg),
321
Nuclear deterrence, 277, 283
Nuclear energy, 350
Nuclear war, 280
Nuclear weapons, 274
Nuremberg Trial, 283
Occam’s Razor, 475
Okamoto, Ippei, 441, 521
Old age, 55–59, 72, 94
One World Award, 256, 278,
430
Onofri, Ugo, 446
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 144,
255, 394, 521–522
Orden pour le mérite, 170
Orientalism, 8–9
Origin of life, 483
Overpopulation, 416
Pacifi sm, 147, 163, 243–260,
263, 265–266, 528
Pais, Abraham, 156, 399, 523
Pantheism, 152, 324, 326
Papagoyim, 344–345
Pasadena, California, 66
Pasadena City College, 79, 97,
100–101
Patriotism, 249, 287–308
Pauli, Wolfgang, 36, 144–145,
394, 523
Pauling, Linus, 284
Peace, 119–120, 143, 206, 252,
255–257, 261–285
Perrin, Jean, 134, 290
Pets, 413–415
Phillips, H. I., 524
Philosophy, 129–130, 149–150,
152–153, 319–345
Physical force, 278, 430
Physical reality, 383, 399, 402,
491–492
Physics, 280, 359, 362–364,
372–373, 384, 387, 391,
394, 399–400, 409, 519
Physics, Jewish, 516–517
Physics education, 100
Physics of the future, 491–492
Pipe smoking, 441, 447
Planck, Erwin, 145–146
Planck, Max, 5, 145–146, 165,
169–170, 173, 349, 375,
524–525
Planck Medal, 381
 
574 Subject Index
Plaut, Paul, 237
Play, 482
Plesch, János, 466, 525
Plesch, Peter, 525
Poincaré, Henri, 382, 525
Politics and politicians, 119–
120, 123–125, 127–128,
147–148, 153, 157–158,
280, 287–308
Polkinghorne, John, 526
Pope, Alexander, 526
Positivism, 395
Posterity, 447
Power, 107, 189, 270, 276
Prejudice, 149, 222, 309–317,
398, 481
Press, 264, 448
Princeton, New Jersey, 71–73
Princeton Theological Seminary,
180
Progress, 102, 265, 285
Prohibition, 448
Prussian Academy of Sciences,
165–166, 371, 525
Psychoanalysis, 121–122,
448–449
Ptolemy, 532
Public speaking, 449
Puzzles, 483–485, 514
Quakers (Society of Friends),
331, 342
Quantum mechanics, 127,
380–381, 401, 491–492
Quantum theory, 358, 365,
379–380, 393, 407–408,
521–522, 525–526
Race, 309–317
Racism, 218
Radio, 382
Rankin, Rep. John, 527
Rathenau, Walther, 146–147
Reading, 175
Reason, 207, 278, 337–338
Reichenbach, Hans, 370
Reichinstein, David, 443
Relativity, 157
“Relativity circus,” 370
Relativity principle, 349, 357,
360
Religion, 151, 220, 277, 319–
345. See also Cosmic
religion
Renaissance, 405
Republic, 296
Reynolds, George, 524
Richards, Alan, 26, 527
Rickshaw pullers, 449–450
Riverside Church, New York,
220
Robeson, Paul, 309, 312, 315
Rocco, Alfredo, 452
Rogers, Eric, 427, 524
Röhm, Ernst, 127
Rolland, Romain, 147, 154,
162, 263, 528
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 281
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 120,
147–148, 271
Rosen, Friedrich, 9
Rosen, Nathan, 388–389
Rosenbloom, Solomon, 198
Rosenthal-Schneider, Ilse, 56,
129, 148–149, 369, 396,
529
Rossetter, Jack, 529
Rothschild, Lord, 207
Rubens, Heinrich, 515
Ruebush, Marvin, 17
Ruling class, 177
Rusch, Franz, 419
Russell, Bertrand, 149–150,
276, 285, 387, 529–530
 
Subject Index 575
Russell-Einstein Manifesto,
285
Russia, 136–137, 194, 216. See
also Soviet Union
Russo, Henry, 16
Ryffel, J., 530
Sailing, 450, 503, 533, 536–537
Salaman, Esther, 324, 457
Samuel, Herbert, 12
Savic´, Helene, 4, 40
Schaerer-Meyer, E., 93
Scharl, Joseph, 458
Schayer, M., 325, 444
Schering-Kahlbaum company,
176
Schleicher, Kurt von, 127
Schnabel, Artur, 530
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 329,
364
Schubert, Franz, 235, 237
Schulmann, Robert, xi–xii
Schumann, Robert, 235
Schwarz, Boris, 92
Schweitzer, Albert, 150, 530
Science, 129, 382, 384, 390–392,
399, 402, 404–406, 429,
483; and art, 379, 415; and
politics, 291; and religion,
207, 327, 333–336, 339–340
Science fi ction, 430
Scientifi c discovery, 371, 396,
435
Scientifi c hypothesis, 364, 397
Scientifi c proof, 371
Scientifi c research, 67, 114,
119, 122, 131, 296, 323,
330, 363, 385–388, 400
Scientifi c theories, 357, 362,
366–369, 376–378, 380,
384–385, 390–391, 397,
400, 444, 483
Scientifi c thought, 102–103,
114, 123, 364, 388
Scientists, 122, 246, 274, 279–
280, 296, 361, 375–376,
379–380, 382, 394–396,
402, 405–406, 409. See also
names of scientists
Sculpture, 450
Security, 182, 256, 259, 281
Seelig, Carl, 20, 23, 27, 41, 45,
50, 353, 407
Seldes, George, 26
Senate Internal Security Subcommittee,
303, 305
Service, ideal of, 103–104, 106–
107, 115, 135, 178, 183,
185–186, 189, 230–232, 334
Service, Robert, 531
Sex education, 451
Shankland, Robert, 140
Sharrett, Moishe, 532
Shaw, George Bernard, 150–
151, 207, 532
Shea, Edward, 306
Sheen, Bishop Fulton J., 151,
533
Shenstone, Allen, 422
Shinohara, Seiei, 259, 284
Shoemaker, Frank, 524
Simon & Schuster, 447
Simple life, 13, 19
Simplicity, 385, 397, 475. See
also Einstein, Albert:
simplicity
Simultaneity, 354, 356, 362
Sinclair, Upton, 152
Singer, Kurt, 236
Sitter, Willem de, 487
Slavery, 311
Snow, C. P., 533
Socialism, 136–137, 298, 300,
302, 490
 
576 Subject Index
Social justice, 214
Social science, 401
Solitude, 185
Solovine, Maurice, 64, 135,
197, 202, 340, 379, 401,
404–405, 409, 431, 438,
444, 533–534
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 162, 169,
357, 359, 362
Sorani, Aldo, 534
Soul, individual, 176, 323, 327,
336
Soviet Union, 131–134, 246,
255, 292, 302, 304
Space, 373, 402
Space-time problems, 25
Spain, 527
Specialization, 102, 105, 120
Special theory of relativity,
139, 145, 284, 349–356,
366, 407
Speed of light, 139–140,
351–353
Spinoza, Baruch, 152–153, 321,
324–325, 338, 467
Spiritualism, 446
Squire, John Collings, 526
Stachel, John, xii
Stalin, Joseph, 156, 302, 476
Stark, Johann, 358
Starkenstein, Emil, 201
State, the, 251, 289
Stern, I., 459
Stevenson, Adlai, 153
Stodola, Aurel, 162
Stone, I. F., 534
Strassmann, Fritz, 284
Straus, Ernst, 25, 128, 344, 415,
535
Strauss, Richard, 170, 235
Students, 97–109
Study, Edward, 364
Stupidity, 187, 478
Success, 107, 163, 174, 178,
230, 451
Sudoplatov, Pavel, 132
Sullivan, J.W.N., 382
Superstition, 223, 323
Swing, Raymond, 255
Swiss Federal Polytechnical
Institute, 31
Switzer, J. S., 405
Szent-Gyorgy, Albert, 535
Szilard, Leo, 153, 270–271, 284,
343
Tagore, Rabindranath, 154,
238, 327, 419, 517, 535
Tapestry, 230
Teachers and teaching, 428–
429. See also Education
Technology, 246, 272, 383, 464
Television, 93
Tesla, Nikola, 154
Theisman, Joe, 535
Theoretical physicists, 360,
363–364, 376, 394, 491
Theory of invariants, 375
Theory of relativity, 10, 23, 36,
64, 77, 138, 144–145, 357–
359, 362–363, 376–378,
390, 394–395, 407–408;
consequences of, 366–367;
foundations, 356, 372–
374; Mileva and, 34; proof
of, 520; reception of, 393,
427–428, 516; use of term,
349, 375. See also General
theory of relativity; Special
theory of relativity
Theosophy, 446
Thermodynamics, 352, 398
Thomas, Norman, 305
Thomson, Joseph John, 536
 
Subject Index 577
Thoreau, Henry David, 125
Thought, 443, 451–452. See also
Scientifi c thought
Thought world (Gedankenwelt),
18
Time, 113, 129, 354, 373, 481,
524
Tito (Josip Broz), 302
Tolerance, 297
Tolstoy, Leo, 125, 154–155
Toscanini, Arturo, 155
Totalitarianism, 69
Tradition, 168, 183, 204, 208–
210, 212, 214–215, 217,
221, 313, 428
Translation, 463
Treiman, Sam, 524
Truman, Harry S., 315
Truth, 100, 102, 181, 187–188,
323, 327–328, 368, 452–453
Twersky, Johanon, 147
Unemployment, 238–239, 299,
432–433
Unifi ed fi eld theory, 379, 381,
386, 391, 400, 404–406, 523
United Nations, 216
Universe, 327, 403; origin of,
539
University of California, Los
Angeles, 384
University of Commerce,
Tokyo, 411
University of Göttingen, 143
University of Sydney, 149
USSR. See Soviet Union
Vallentin, Antonina, 406,
536–537
Varic´ak, Vladimir, 36
Veblen, Oswald, 374
Vegetarianism, 453–454, 477
Violence, 293–295, 455
Voltaire (François-Marie
Arouet), 151
Wachsmann, Konrad, 241, 442,
450, 537
Wada, F. S., 413
Wagner, Evelyn, 163
Wagner, Richard, 235
Wall, Frank, 440
Wallace, Henry, 309
Wallenberg, Raoul, 156
War, 245, 247–250, 254, 258,
261–285, 295–296. See also
Nuclear war; Pacifism;
World War I; World War II
Warschauer, Gertrud, 57, 71,
94, 120
Wealth, 455–456
Weimar Republic, 167
Weizmann, Chaim, 63, 156,
198–199, 206, 537–538
Weizmann, Vera, 501, 538
Weizsaecker, C. F. von, 538
Wells, H. G., 207
Wertheimer, Max, 5, 351
West, Andrew Fleming, 538
Weyl, Hermann, 157, 394
Wheeler, John, 95, 157, 524,
539
White, Walter, 315
Whittier College, California,
250
Wien, Wilhelm, 161
Wightman, Arthur, 524
Wigner, Eugene, 524
Wilhelm, Kaiser, 168
William of Ockham, 475
Williams, Myfanwy, 81
Williams, W. H., 539–542
Wilson, Barbara, 80
Wilson, Woodrow, 157–158
 
578 Subject Index
Winawer, Bruno, 332
Winteler, Jost, 161
Winteler, Marie, 439
Winteler, Pauline, 3
Wisdom, 189, 456
Wise, Rabbi Stephen, 127, 167,
295, 386
Wittig, Hans, 453
Woehr, A., 238–239
Wolff, Cornelia, 464
Wolsey, Rabbi Louis, 216
Women, 63, 81–82, 113, 456–
457, 501; in science and
math, 116–118, 139, 143–
144, 148–149, 457
Women Patriot Corporation,
64, 442
Wonder, 452
Woolf, Samuel J., 230
Work, 457–458
Working class, 209
World government, 243–260,
268, 272, 282, 295, 298, 476
World War I, 21, 173, 263, 266,
276, 292
World War II, 133, 276–277,
279, 283
Wright, Phyllis, 80, 388
Yaron, Reuven, xii
Yeshiva College, 211
Youth, 458–459
Zangger, Heinrich, 111, 543;
letters to, 5–7, 36, 39, 41,
44, 46–48, 52, 55, 117, 128,
134, 137, 145, 157, 162–
163, 173–174, 358, 360–
361, 364, 389, 418, 455, 458
Zionism, 191–225, 490,
534–535
Zschimmer, E., 375
 
